i never dreamed before
i'm gonna knock the door into the world of perfect free
(you ain't no lonely!
you're gonna say i'm lying
i'm gonna get the chance
i thought a chance is far from me
(you ain't no lonely!
i was made to hit in america
you are the sun, you are the star
i was made to hit in america
c-major pentatonic scale
it's no good.
i can't learn this.
c-major pentatonic scale
it's too hard for me.
fool!
but it's better to learn the scale early.
fool!
you stupid bird!
i'll show you!
don't rush it, koyuki-kun.
it's only been two months since you started playing the guitar.
but he already knows the scale...
c'mon, we need a change of pace.
let's go swimming!
huh?
lucille
okay, here goes!
watch the ball!
what?
umm...
so please buy your own melon roll.
it's the truth.
i was called to the faculty office.
s-see you...
hold it, tanaka!
yukio tanaka of grade 8b.
please go to the faculty office immediately.
i repeat...
listen, tanaka-kun...
i don't think you're taking your job as umbrella monitor seriously.
huh?
oh, no...
daily life is a series of little jobs like this.
maybe i should put this in your student report...
i'm disappointed in you, tanaka-kun.
you may go.
wait, tanaka-kun!
what is this?
what happened?
oh...
it's nothing.
we were kidding around and tanabe-kun did a drop kick on me.
tanaka-kun...
and naturally, i gave it back to him with a heel hold!
so it's no big deal!
tanaka-kun...
did you catch that game?
yeah!
that was awesome!
you look glum, koyuki!
maho!
yo!
maho, you sure eat a lot.
huh?
shut up.
i'm hungry.
you'll gain weight.
you can have my fries.
beck's first live performance has been set!
huh?
r-really?
how long is this going to continue?
i'll talk to him for you.
okay...
okay, i'm going on deliveries, so make up for being late and work extra hard.
i'm sorry!
and don't forget to feed page.
i'm off!
he sure is strict.
yeah.
around strangers.
it's okay, i'll feed him.
he's...
you little-!
t-this is the last of it!
oww...
huh?
what is this?
these aren't company documents!
they're saito-san's personal treasure!
treasure?
i mean, private collection.
collection?
koyuki, how long have you been working here?
since the end of summer break.
what for?
i want to repair the guitar ryusuke-kun gave me.
i didn't know...
that's why i don't want to see ryusuke-kun until the guitar is fixed.
right.
i understand.
so, how much do you get paid?
oh, umm...430 yen an hour.
are you serious?
that's crazy!
this new law sure is bad for the manufacturing industry.
saito-sama, this way please.
yes.
thank you for waiting.
rie-chan!
thank you for calling her.
oh, it's ken-ken!
rie-rie!
i missed you sooo much!
me too!
what's with the get-up?
caught a cold or something?
i'm in disguise!
but how'd you guess it was me?
you stand out too much.
okay, it's starting!
ryusuke-kun's guitar...
are those bullet marks?
yup.
they're real.
is that...
that guitar has a name...
it's lucille.
sounds like a woman's name.
yeah...
it's a guitar with a past...
ryusuke got it in some dangerous place.
but...
it couldn't possibly have happened while he was performing?
one, two!
typhoon 24!
24-7!
24 hours straight!
beck!
b-e-c-k!
we're gonna rush at you!
we're gonna send you flyin' head-first!
lift up your heavy ass, now
if you take off that stiff head you'll feel totally loose
this crazy, crazy world
you just have to stage dive or die
mind blower, a shower of sweat
run towards a new world, my life
those who seek it will be rewarded
pass the hot shot, keep on coming, come on!
blow your mind
squeeze your sweat yeah
blow your mind
squeeze your sweat
this...is beck...
koyuki-kun...
can you go over to hayakama instruments?
huh?
there's still more?
the guitar's fixed now.
huh?
the one with the broken neck.
i sent it out for repairs.
i-is that true?
you want to patch things up with ryusuke, don't you?
saito-san!
now go, hurry!
okay!
koyuki-kun...
deduction for leaving early.
i think this'll do.
if you notice something while playing it, just let me know.
now i can see ryusuke-kun!
hey, tanaka...
hey, tanaka.
lemme play that guitar.
yuck!
what an awful sound...
suits you perfectly!
hey, masaru.
lemme try.
what?
forget it, rikiya-kun.
the sound is the pits.
you laughed just now, didn't you?
huh?
don't act innocent!
no, i thought that tune was "anarchy in heaven"...
recently, the sex handles
damn thing!
any complaints?
didn't think so.
it was a piece of junk anyway.
let's go, masaru!
yeah.
let's go grind someplace.
how about new burger?
oh!
did you get it, koyuki-kun?
yeah...
oh, good!
it's all fixed, then?
actually, it's been slow here at saito paper company, so getting the money to fix it was a bit hard.
but it was worth it to see you smiling again!
saito-san...
thank you!
oh, you're welcome!
mom used to say, "from that day on, yukio was like someone possessed by the guitar, and played it every single day.
you were great at the concert!
think so?
i just looove your vocals, chiba-kun!
we won't miss your next live performance!
then i'll put you on the guest list!
give me your names and numbers!
hey, ray!
i've gotta talk to you!
huh?
what?
what're you mad about all of a sudden?
wow!
ryusuke-kun, you speak english!
that's so cool!
yeah.
i lived in new york for a long time.
so i'm more used to english than japanese.
that's so cool!
we've got to go to new york, too!
tell us where you used to live!
yeah!
we wanna visit it!
sure.
yay!
those idiots!
i was looking for the ab machine i bought by mail order last night... and i finally found it!
found what?
look!
this is it...
the l48 eddie gave to you!
huh?
then the one i gave to koyuki was...
that was a fake one you got at the guitar shop in queens!
which means...
ryusuke-kun!
don't get tetanus!
yukio!
telephone!
yukio!
i called ryusuke too.
you're joking, right?
oh, speak of the devil.
sorry!
maho...
did you really explain it to him?
i did!
idiot!
why am i running away?
oh, koyuki!
izumi-chan!
i spoke to ryusuke-kun on the phone yesterday and he said to say hi.
oh...
can you say hello from me, too?
all 9th graders will report to the gym for curriculum guidance.
i repeat...
it's almost graduation.
yeah...
i'll be lonely.
really?
see you, koyuki!
dear koyuki-kun,
i've decided to stay here a bit longer, so please take care of page!
he's extending his stay again!
southeast asia must have something that lures grown men...
fool!
i haven't played yet!
punk rockers hold their guitars low...
awright!
yay!
cripes!
i'd better go to sleep!
kugatsu no umi wa darui hito
look...
eiji...
look at him...
didn't he make his band successful all by himself?
we just do things our way.
umm...
ginger ale.
okay.
hey, koyuki!
why'd you run away the other day?
sorry!
koyuki!
let's go up front!
let's go concrete hell, human safari park escape
ape in the brain, mass brain-washing operation, no thank you
let's walk together, step in step, and we'll get stuck in the deep
i-is this what rap is?
let's walk together, step in step, and we'll get stuck in the deep
i-is this what rap is?
we're at the rebellious age, free as we go
huh?
you say something?
we're at the rebellious age, free as we go
this is no barrier, just what is important, nothing impure, just clear
no pressure at our pace
who?
foojin
takes me cruisin'
music that cuts through the wind, free form
bullet holes in the body...
that's a creepy guitar...
the acoustic pick-up in the front is broken.
he has a roger mayer at his feet.
but...
how is he getting such a sound?
wow!
amazing!
hey, look at that poster!
i'm gonna get a shot of it!
so this is where ryusuke-kun grew up!
isn't it cool!
totally!
huh?
that dog...
another minute
feelin' so fine
you turn the freeze into warm light
had a premonition
i've been waitin' ever since
my world comin' down
it's got me spinnin' 'round
if you really wanna fly you gotta let go
simply the most big sensation
she's really pretty
one-eyed vision
little sister showed me
really took me for a ride
my world comin' down
cuttlefish...
grilled matsutake mushrooms...
next episode
broadcast in the school
grilled matsutake mushrooms...
next episode
broadcast in the school
mackerel...
eggplant, shortcake...
next episode
broadcast in the school
eat it all!
__file_terminal__
susan polgar lives and works in new york city.
she sees the world in a very unusual way.
susan has the brain of a genius- perfectly adapted to her single, lifelong obsession.
susan is the first female chess grandmaster.
but she wasn't born with her brilliant brain.
it was created by an extraordinary childhood.
susan is the living proof of an amazing theory- that any ordinary child can be turned into a genius.
it's sunday morning, and new york's greenwich village is the setting for a showdown.
playing white, susan polgar.
playing black, paul truong, a former us champion at a supercharged form of chess.
blitz.
each player must play the entire game in just sixty seconds.
it's a high speed demonstration of chess playing genius.
you're in total control of your own destiny.
here it's your brain versus the opponent's.
by understanding susan's brilliant brain, we can unlock the potential of our own.
we can understand how people make life or death decisions, faster than a super-computer.
or perform miracles of memory in their every day jobs.
and how in the battle of the sexes, the female brain can out-manoeuvre the male.
i really believe that if you put your mind to it, and you really want it, you can achieve it, whatever it is.
susan's brain is an unstoppable force.
and her opponent has run out of time.
the latest in a long line of distinguished victims.
susan has competed on equal terms with the greatest names in chess, like garry kasparov, anatoly karpov, and even the great bobby fischer.
but susan's genius is no accident of birth.
she was once an ordinary four year old, whose life was transformed by a unique education.
susan polgar grew up a world away from new york city.
in the late 1960s,
hungary still languished in the iron grip of the soviet union.
for the ordinary citizens of budapest, daily life was a grim struggle to make ends meet.
the future queen of the chessboard was hardly born a princess.
that is the street i was born in, where i used to live for the first ten years of my life.
the house is still here.
the closest side that you see was my room, and that's where i first learned to play chess.
and then a second room was where my parents were sleeping and was kind of a living room.
it brings back a lot of memories.
if susan's home was ever so humble, her father was a man with a unique vision.
a trained psychologist,
laszlo polgar had made a deep study of the childhood origins of genius.
the archetypal example was wolfgang amadeus mozart.
already composing at the age of five, he seemed to be the classic case of a child born with special gifts.
but laszlo noted that mozart's father leopold, himself an accomplished musician, gave his son early and invaluable schooling in his craft.
laszlo decided that specialised training was more important than natural talent, and he had an astonishing plan that would put his theory to the test.
when zsuzsa, or susan, was born in april 1969, the polgar family experiment was underway.
her father had already written a book called "bringing up genius".
and it said that genius was not born- but made.
it reads here, a quote:
which means:
a genius equals work and fortunate circumstances.
by 'fortunate circumstance',
laszlo meant the happy home that he and his wife klara would provide.
and the hard work would be guaranteed by schooling susan himself.
my father believed that the potential of most children is not used optimally.
he felt that there is not much i would get out of going to school daily.
laszlo planned to train susan in mathematics, but she chose her own future by a happy accident.
one day unexpectedly, in a search for a new toy,
i opened a cabinet and a chess set fell out and i asked my mum what is it?
and she said:
oh, this is a chess set, although i can't help you much with it, because i don't know how to play with it¡­ but wait until daddy comes home and he'll teach you with pleasure.
there was no history of brilliant chess players in the polgar family.
laszlo himself was strictly an amateur.
but he was convinced he could train his daughter to be a genius at anything- as long as she was a willing student.
my father strongly believes that it could have been any other field¡­ and the very same methods would have been used.
first of all it's very important for a child to love the specific field, which in our case was chess¡­
and then the rest comes easy.
easy, perhaps, if susan had chosen music, or science.
but devoting her childhood to chess made the quest for genius much harder- for one reason.
in the early 1970s, chess was totally dominated by men.
some of the world's best players believed that the female brain just couldn't cope with the game.
a little girl was about to prove them wrong.
these are the gardens of blenheim palace in oxfordshire- home to one of the biggest hedge mazes in the world.
this type of navigation problem is a well known battleground of the sexes.
men never ask for directions- they think they're better than women at getting from a to b.
professor peter mcleod has come to find out whether, just sometimes, they might be right.
there are many stereotypes about the differences between the way that men and women solve problems, and although some of these stereotypes may be based on prejudices and biases, when you find the same stereotypes appear in all cultures and all over the world,
you can't help thinking there must something in them.
ten boys and ten girls are trying to reach the statue at the centre of the maze.
but the first objective is a wooden bridge that gives an overview of the layout.
this is where mcleod and his maze runners will gather their thoughts.
how are you doing?
it's really, really hard.
do you recognise any of it?
well¡­ which are the bits where you've been?
i went round that far side with the zig-zaggy bits, and then up here.
i remember most of the turns that i have been through.
the boys seem to be looking at the big picture.
they have a strong memory of where they've been, and where they need to go.
i'm just trying to keep going in that direction.
or at least, they think they do.
i'm going to go right, no i'm not, i'm going left.
oh, god!
why?
the human brain has two hemispheres, left and right.
most of our thinking happens in a thin outer layer of each, called the cortex.
but in males, the cortex is thicker in the right brain, which excels at spatial thinking.
so boys are thought to use a highly spatial strategy.
they create a mental image of the whole maze to use as a map.
then they might use a reference point like the sun, to figure out where they are.
and by rotating their mental maps, they can then decide which way to turn next.
so the boys have good spatial awareness, navigating with a strong sense of where they are in the overall maze.
okay, let's try¡­ right.
but are the girls thinking the same way?
if you had to draw a map of the maze when you got out, do you think you could do it?
no.
what could you remember when you got out, do you think?
probably the bit with all the circles, and you go from circle to circle.
cos you can remember what the circles looked like, is that the idea?
the girls are less interested in the big picture.
they're picking up on specific details.
i now know where to go now, because once i get out of these circle bits¡­
they're using some distinctive circular hedges as landmarks.
like the boys, the girls also use their right brains for navigation.
but in the girls, the corpus callosum, which connects the two halves of the brain, is better developed.
so girls also rely on the left brain, which excels at verbal reasoning, rather than the whole maze, they focus on features that they can describe in words, like the circular hedges.
the girls' navigate by following a list of directions, from landmark to landmark.
but with no overall map of the maze, it's easy to lose sight of the landmarks- and get lost.
well this is annoying!
this particular maze might favour boys because it doesn't have many obvious visual features in it, the hedges all look the same, there are some shapes, but there aren't clear points that you might remember.
in this kind of maze, scientists consistently find that boys come out ahead, by using their mental maps.
yes!
i'm there.
in mazes with more prominent landmarks, it's the girls who would take the honours.
but today, they have to settle for second place.
found it!
in the early 1970s, it was taken for granted that chess also required a typically male way of thinking.
like the maze problem, the game seems to depend on a spatial awareness of the board and all the pieces.
but then susan polgar came along.
when she was still just a tiny girl, her father planned to prove that gender differences in the brain were not important.
i definitely would agree that there are differences in brain, and men and women think differently, i'm not disputing that.
it doesn't mean necessarily that one is worse than the other, and that's the beauty of it,
i think that's the beauty of life that we don't all have to be a certain way to succeed, there can be many roads to rome, as they say.
just a few months after she learned the game,
laszlo took susan to voros meteor, the most formidable chess club in budapest.
susan was about to face male opposition in more ways than one.
wow, i haven't been here in over 15 years, and this is the first place i ever came to a chess club.
i first came here, late 1973 or very early 1974.
and well, the place so far looks exactly as it did then.
i walked in a room, it was full of smoke with elder men.
them thinking that my father is looking for a game, and just brought me along.
but the reality was my father wanted me to have a game to see how i'll do against the members of the club.
the club members thought laszlo was mad.
but if they were ready to humour a pretty little girl, they weren't ready for what happened next.
susan began the habit of a lifetime- beating men at chess.
i had a whole bunch of guys after losing to me, complaining.
one said:
oh i didn't sleep well.
the next one:
i was sick.
the third one:
i had a stomach ache, you know, it's like, was kind of going on in a series, and you know i jokingly said that i've never beaten a healthy man.
the only man who wasn't shocked was laszlo polgar.
he was building susan's training around a mental skill that didn't depend on either the left or right brain.
girls could master it just as easily as boys, and before long,
susan was literally beating men with her eyes closed.
susan's about to play a game of chess with a difference.
okay, why don't you be white?
okay, e4.
e4.
c5.
knight to c3.
susan's friend ed has the chessboard in front of him, just like in a normal game.
knight to c6.
but susan doesn't need it.
she's playing the game in her head.
the only board she needs is in her mind's eye.
f5.
now you've gotta be careful.
amateur players like ed have to see the board, to keep track of all 32 chess men.
i'll play g5.
but susan follows all the moves using her fundamental chess ability
memory.
playing without a board helps to train the memory, and susan has been practising since childhood.
i'm going to sacrifice my knight now.
knight takes g5.
you're sacrificing a knight?
susan can play up to five games in her head, simultaneously.
bishop takes g5.
rook e8.
rook f3.
knight e5.
rook g3.
king f8.
the queen's moving in for the kill.
¡­to g4.
queen h8, check.
now it's over.
king e7.
checkmate!
susan, that's not a nice way to say hello!
when it comes to chess,
susan can perform miracles of memory.
in fact, she's doing something that should be impossible.
an ongoing task like a game of chess, is handled by a mental function known as 'working memory', at the very front of the brain.
the relevant brain cells, or neurons, store any necessary information by forming a network of electrical connections.
but these connections die away within seconds, so working memory is limited.
it's like a temporary scratchpad, that can only store about seven items of information.
that's why the seven digits of a new phone number are about as much as most people remember.
but just how good is susan's working memory?
this is thompson street in new york, home of the city's sidewalk chess cafes.
and we're about to give susan a memory test.
can she memorise all the pieces and pawns on this diagram?
that's 28 items of information.
to make things even trickier, the diagram has been pasted to the side of a cafe's speeding van.
susan only has time for a single, three second glance.
but watch this.
susan's working memory is working overtime.
she's made an exact copy.
to explain her miracle of memory, this scientist has come to a very surprising place.
the diners at this london restaurant don't know it, but their table is under surveillance.
he's proceeding here in a counter-clockwise order.
psychologist anders ericsson, has spent nearly 30 years studying amazing memories- and it doesn't have to be chess grandmasters.
more and more we've been interested in every day life kind of expert performance, somebody who can do something that is extraordinary.
he's expecting a bravura performance from spanish waiter, vincente sancho.
i think have a good memory.
i have the memory of my grandmum.
good afternoon, are you ready to order?
yeah.
okay.
may i have a vodka cranberry, please?
and then i'll take the baby squid risotto.
risotto.
they're giving drink orders as well as the meal.
this is going to be challenging for him.
do you have any beer?
only tiger.
okay, then can i start off with the gnocchi with chestnut¡­
like susan, vincente's working memory has to take in a lot of information- but he never writes anything down.
can i start with the sauteed baby squid please?
and this is going to be a tall order.
okay¡­ caponata.
caponata¡­ yeah.
¡­ medium rare.
medium rare.
the nero risotto.
nero risotto.
and then i'll have the gnocchi¡­
the question is- how many orders can he handling working memory?
so, vodka cranberry, nero risotto and the skate, tiger beer, with the gnocchi and the beef rare, the nero risotto, the monkfish and gin and tonic¡­
it seems vincente can remember far more than seven orders.
pinot grigio, pede quadra, and your beef medium are.
the glasses of sauvignon, the buldra, and the neo risotto and the monkfish.
for the lady the glass of pinot grigio, gnocchi, john dory and a couple of bottles of water for the table.
there it is.
thank you very much.
twenty-three orders in all.
that's impressive.
like susan,
vincente seems to exceed the normal limits of working memory.
and the beef medium rare.
but how is he doing it?
vincent, that was really impressive.
really want to understand here how you were doing this.
now you're coming in, do you know who you're going to ask to give you the first order?
yes, it's always the best to start from my left¡­
okay.
so to try to keep in order.
the first one, brunete, she has a white top and thin jeans.
the second one blonde, blonde almost white hair.
i thought she's not sure¡­ about what to drink, about what to order.
it seems that vincente doesn't remember all 23 orders individually.
instead, he packs the information down, to make it manageable using the normal seven items of working memory.
i associate the person, the dates, and the number, it's like all together, i don't know how to explain, but it comes altogether.
he forms a strong mental image of each customer and then attaches that customer's orders to the image.
this seems to be a common technique used by experts in all fields
it's called chunking.
it is a little like phone numbers.
one of my best phone numbers was 492 1492.
and given that 1492 was when columbus discovered america, you don't have to keep track of the individual digits any longer, all the four digits will be retrieved as a symbol group from memory.
susan handles the information on a chessboard in exactly the same way.
she doesn't remember all the pieces individually- instead, she breaks everything down into chunks.
the menacing formation of whites, queen and bishops is one chunk.
the heavily protected black king is another.
susan only has to remember five chunks- easily manageable in normal working memory.
but without chunking, her memory is no better than anyone else's.
and here's the proof.
in the chess diagram on the other side of the van, the pieces have been placed at random by a non-chess player.
so this time, there are no recognisable chunks.
now susan's trying to remember 24 individual pieces- and she can't do it.
all the pieces are in random position.
it's jus so much harder to remember, especially under a very short time.
but how does susan identify chess chunks?
to her they're lifelong friends.
memories that were implanted in her brain during her extraordinary childhood.
susan polgar's second childhood home was in this budapest tower block.
we're almost there.
the tiny family apartment was a production factory, where susan's brain was engineered for the game of chess.
the current tenants have no idea that a genius formed her earliest memories within these walls.
wow.
still the same.
my phone used to be here.
when we finally got a phone for the first time we used to keep it there.
wow, and this used to be the living room.
this is where susan did some of the hardest work of her life, for up to six hours a day.
i used to have a wall of chess books here, a library of chess books.
a collection of four to 5,000 of different titles.
and actually i even had a catalogue of chess games.
a collection of 200,000 games, manually been cut from various chess magazines and newspapers, and sorted by various openings and various players.
this massive effort was required throughout susa's childhood to commit the complex secrets of chess to memory.
the number of possible games is vastly greater than the number of atoms in the universe.
but chess chunks are the order in the chaos.
these small but typical formations appear again and again in different games.
they are the basic words in the language of chess.
most ten year olds know only 10,000 words.
at the same age,
susan was devoting her childhood to learning 100,000 chess chunks.
this process would physically transform her brain.
with constant repetition, information moves from working memory into long term memory.
working memory lasts only seconds, until the electrical connections between neurons die away.
but in long term memory, the repetition of these currents stimulates the neurons to form new and permanent connections.
the memorised information is now hard-wired, and can last a lifetime.
like anyone else,
susan's long term memory is a storehouse of family faces and lifetime experiences.
but now chess chunks were also indelibly imprinted on her brain.
by the early 1980s, the polgar chess factory had stepped up its output.
susan's two younger sisters, sofia and judith, were next on the genius assembly line.
and within a few years, the family would be ready to take the world of chess by storm.
at 15, susan was already the top ranked female payer in the world.
at the 1985 new york open, she caused a sensation by beating a grandmaster for the first time.
by 1989, 12 year old judith had a winning streak of eight competitions in a row.
at 14, sofia annihilated four grandmasters for one of the greatest tournament results of all time.
just watching them seated at chessboards
i immediately had a sense that i had never seen with women players elsewhere.
susan is still a powerful presence at the board.
like all the polgar sisters, she seems to make a move as easily as taking a breath.
there seemed to be a line direct from their brain to the end of the finger and the piece moved and that was it.
but it should be beyond the power of a human brain to pick the best move.
there are roughly four billion possibilities for the next three moves alone.
that's a calculation only a supercomputer could perform.
so how can susan move at this incredible speed?
for hartston, the only explanation is that her human brain is using a very human skill.
we seem to heap a lot of praise on people's calculating ability, but take for granted¡­ all sorts of mental abilities that are absolutely intuitive.
intuition sounds more like magic than science.
but hartston believes it is a specific skill displayed by experts in all fields- and it can be explained.
by training, william hartston is a psychologist and a former united kingdom chess champion.
it's not as bad as i feared.
but today, he's going back to square one- as a trainee fire fighter.
hartston plans to compare his novice skills with those of expert fire fighter, leigh corke.
if you want to take a quick look at the smoke that's coming out there at the moment.
i'm going into that?
you're going into there, yeah.
they're up against a terrifying opponent.
this is flashover- a major killer of fire fighters.
my wife always said i'd go to hell!
he has no previous experience, but he thinks he as a logical plan of attack.
he aims to control one side of the fire, then quickly switch to the other.
okay, left, left.
where's it going now?
right?
missed.
but logic isn't working.
the fire's making moves he can't predict.
it keeps coming back- at me!
lift upwards¡­
what i was doing was trying to apply rules and sopping and thinking,
i always had to stop and see what the effect of what i was doing was.
too much water.
hartston's achieved nothing but a cloud of scalding steam.
it's getting smoky.
he's still trying to think his way out of trouble, and now he's suffering from paralysis by analysis.
well we've lost our visibility altogether, haven¡¯t we?
stay down, stay down.
for hartston, it's been a harsh lesson in the wrong way to make decisions.
fire fighter corke shows him how it's done.
¡­ nice and high gas cooling.
for an expert, flame in the overhead smoke is a typical danger sign.
he reacts instantly by cooling the flames- and he doesn't have to think about it.
when you've done something often enough, you don¡¯t have to think about how to do it.
but even more important when you've done it often enough, you know, you sense what the result of it is going to be and you're ready with the next move.
intuition turns out to be a learned skill.
it means trusting your experience- and the ability to recognise and react to familiar patterns.
and surprising as it may seem, chess players rely more heavily on intuition than calculation.
you don't calculate from where you are, you don't look at a list of possibilities¡­ you sense what's the right move and you don¡¯t have to think about how to do it.
an amateur wastes precious time thinking through his possible moves.
but a grandmaster can make the best move without thinking.
i have to trust my instincts, my intuition¡­ and it's basically pattern recognition, it's each and every position, what's my first instinct, what's the best move.
it's almost like guessing¡­ but it's like guessing intelligently kind of, basing it on prior games and experiences.
susan guesses her opponent's moves before he makes them.
for preston lasker, it feels like she's reading his mind.
it was amazing, like playing against like michael jordan or some big sports star.
she definitely has all the pattern recognition down to where she doesn't have¡­ i think¡­ i have to think a lot more than she does.
you know, she just, she pretty much¡­ it's all instinct.
it's pattern recognition that separates the best from the rest.
susan is so good at it, that it's possible her brain has a dedicated pattern processor.
with modern scanning techniques, it might even be possible to identify it.
but there's a problem.
the brain is so complex that to find and identify any specific structure is a daunting task.
but scientists are sometimes given clues, telling them where to look for specific functions.
and it happens when the brain goes wrong.
as an assistant editor at the times,
mary ann sighart is at the top of british journalism.
and yet she can't recognise some of the most familiar patterns of all.
every week i write a column for times 2, and there's a whole bank of people who sub-edit.
and the sub will come in with¡­ one of these, which is a proof of the column and i'll say:
oh thanks very much, and i'll read it through and i'll look for mistakes and then i'll take the proof back to the sub's desk and i'll think: well who was it who gave it to me?
i don't remember!
mary ann suffers from prosopagnosia, commonly known as face blindness.
even finding a close colleague can be next to impossible.
you're sort of tiptoeing round surreptitiously looking at everybody's screen to see if they've got my column up on the screen.
mary ann knows she's looking at a face- she jus doesn't recognise it as someone she knows.
i wish i knew how people recognised other people because it would make it so much easier for me.
but it's as hard for me to understand as it would be for a colour blind person to, you know, if somebody said to them well, can't you see the difference between red and green?
you know, that's red and that's green.
as many as one in 50 people have some degree of face blindness.
but mary ann was unaware of her condition for years, because she has learned to identify people in other ways.
psychologist david wilkinson wants to know more.
so what coping strategies do you use?
oh goodness.
i rely a lot on hair, but that can go horribly wrong when people have a haircut or dye their hair¡­
or no hair.
or no hair, exactly.
voice, gait, - you know the way people stands or walk,
i think i use.
glasses, or any sort of facial hair i find very useful.
yeah, you seem very more keen to focus in on local detail, on parts of the face, and so you're using a different strategy.
well that's what i use to compensate for the fact that i can't recognise the face.
so i think, right, there must be some feature on the face that i can compare, to see which is alike.
i mean i've now worked out you've got a bump here on your nose.
so that would help me next time i see you maybe.
to test mary ann's strategy, we've asked her to take her daughter skating, and to look out for any familiar faces.
now you see, i wouldn't have a clue, if i were looking at the sea of faces.
but what mary ann doesn't know, is that one of these faces belongs to doctor david wilkinson, with whom she's just spent the whole afternoon.
and with him is laura, a secretary from mary ann's office whom she sees every day.
at a distance, mary ann can't pick up on any useful details.
maybe if they go a bit closer¡­
it's not mother and daughters, is it?
no.
wilkinson tries taking his hat off.
finally, he resorts to a bit of slapstick psychology.
oh, god.
are you all right?
i don't believe it!
who is it?
this is a guy called dave, who i spent most of the afternoon with.
and this is evie.
the funny thing is i did say if i saw¡­ who's this?
it's not laura!
and even then, it was only when your face was right up against mine that i spotted your sort of, you know bobble on the nose.
brain scans of people like mary ann have revealed damage to the specific structure that's responsible for face recognition.
the so-called 'fusiform face area' is at the back of the brain, where first processing of information from the eyes takes place.
in a normal brain, it rapidly assesses any new face for its distinctive proportions of eyes, nose, and mouth.
then it looks for a match among all the familiar faces stored in long term memory.
the whole process is lightning fast.
we can recognise people we have met before in approximately 100 milliseconds.
it's about pattern recognition.
you can see the analogy with a chessboard, where again one must identify the individual pieces¡­ but what's really important when you play chess is being able to apprehend the spatial relationships between those pieces.
every brain has a face processor, to help us make sense of the daily sea of faces.
but there are many complex patterns in the world around us.
does the brain have processors for those?
few of us see patterns better than susan polgar.
so we are going to submit this chess grandmaster to a scan- to find out exactly what makes her brilliant brain so unique.
grandmaster susan polgar is about to find out how her brain is perfectly adapted for the game of chess.
she has come to meet professor joy hirsch of colombia university, a leading expert in brain imaging techniques.
and one thing these two women can agree on, is that size doesn't matter.
the female brain is quite a bit smaller than the male brain in general, and we know that there's no difference in our intelligence.
absolutely!
i agree on that one!
hirsch intends to scan susan's brain using mri, or magnetic resonance imaging.
inside the scanner,
susan can see projected images of some of the world's most famous chess players.
and so far, her brain is responding exactly as expected.
the fusiform face area, her brain's dedicated face processor, is powerfully activated.
but does susan's brain have another processor that's dedicated to chess patterns?
she's now looking at diagrams from her own chess games- some dating back to her distant childhood in budapest.
she's been asked to think about each diagram as if it's a game in progress, calculating her next move.
these are the first scans of a world champion's brain playing chess.
but a comparison with the face recognition scan leads to a remarkable discovery.
we're looking at the bottom of the brain, four slices, and these two areas;
this is the fusiform face area.
susan is using exactly the same area of her brain for both faces and chess.
for you, we can't discriminate a face area from a chess area, they are identical.
astonishingly, susan's brain has hijacked the fusiform face area and adapted it to chess.
instead of faces, it's comparing incoming chess positions with the vast library of games in her long term memory.
susan can recognise a familiar game in just 0.8 seconds- almost as fast as the face of an old friend.
years of intense childhood training literally molded susan's brain for the game.
it's solid evidence for her father's theory- that genius can be created.
i definitely agree with my father that the work art, the diligence part is the most important and i think that being trained properly, anybody can achieve practically anything.
at the age of 21, the quality and number of susan's victories against top opposition earned her the official title of grandmaster.
the first woman among nearly 600 men.
youngest sister judith quickly followed suit.
ranked in the top fifteen male players, she is now a leading contender for the world title.
and there's one more twist in the polgar family story.
this florida holiday resort is the unlikely setting for the united states championships for school children.
inspired by the polgar sisters, girls now compete on equal terms with boys.
but susan's attention is riveted on the tense deciding match for the seven year olds of the second grade.
yash pershad battles for the title against susan's son, tommy.
he's a fighter and he's used to playing long games.
so i have my fingers crossed, and hoping things will end well.
six year old leeam will be next in line.
susan sands at a discreet distance, getting used to a new kind of tension- as a chess mum.
i won!
i got first place.
he played well until the end, and then he messed up a lot.
he stepped into a one move checkmate, and now i'm the us champion.
the national champion who, with 6.5 points is
tom polgar!
if they want to be grandmasters,
tommy and leeam won't have to look too far for the best possible training.
but they better be ready to work hard.
tomorrow we'll go to disney and have lots of fun.
and then¡­ after the tournament is over that's when we go into in depth analysis of the games and where mistakes were made and how to improve on them.
are these two more geniuses in the making?
subtitles synchronized by hattie for mvgroup.org
__file_terminal__
beautiful.
lollia!
where did you find her?
we saw her first in antioch when titus was on duty there.
we thought her so superb that titus paid for her to tour the provinces.
and now, my dear friends, the entertainment is over.
it was wwonderful and a b-b-beautiful dinner.
thank you, but i wasn't inviting a compliment.
it's just that i have something to perform.
and i've brought you here, as our dearest friends, to be with me.
what's this?
a surprise for me too?
yes, my dear, it is.
she never tells me anything.
very naughty to surprise our guests and not tell your husband.
you know that i love you very much?
now i'm really worried.
this is going to cost a fortune!
how much have you spent?
nothing.
i've spent nothing.
you may remember that a weak ago tonight, we went to a dinner given by the emperor.
of course.
you may also remember that tiberius was fascinated by our daughter.
i must admit, i saw him looking at camilla once or twice.
what you don't know is that she received a summons to the palace the next day.
what?
a summons?
you never told me.
i thought it best not to put you in a position where you would object.
what is this, lollia?
what are you telling me?
a summons to the emperor is not something to be refused, but i wouldn't let my daughter go alone, knowing his reputation.
so i went with her.
we went into a room i imagine he keeps for such receptions.
i'd never bean into that room before, not met anyone who had.
the walls were hung with what the emperor imagines is erotic art.
they depict scenes of incredible beastliness - not fit for anyone to look at, let alone a young girl
lollia, why are you telling me this now in front of all our friends?
these are not just friends.
they are all. in their different ways, important people in rome.
that's why they're here tonight.
he took camilla up to show her the paintings and talked about them as if they were works of art.
when i objected and said he should be ashamed of himself for trying to corrupt a young girl, he simply smiled and said, "what about an old one?
no, titus, please.
then he clapped his hands, and a slave appeared from another room carrying a tray of wine.
the slave was naked... and while tiberius spoke to her, he stroked the slave...
in his twisted way, he thought it might inflame camilla's passions.
but camilla burst into tears and begged to be allowed to leave.
he then pretended to be upset and complained she'd given him a different impression at the dinner.
he then turned to me and told me to go home.
no more!
no, titus.
no, enough.
let me finish!
if i'd had this with me then, i'd have used it on him.
instead, i begged a moment with him alone.
he granted it.
and there, i offered myself in my daughter's place.
yes, titus, my husband... to save my daughter, i offered myself in her place.
and he accepted.
my dear, that was nothing for me to save her.
i took her to the gate... and warned her not to say anything to anyone... and then returned.
don't, lollia, please...
i've nearly finished.
i said that to prostitute myself for my daughter was nothing.
what wouldn't we do to save our children?
i should have gone to the gate... into the room, out again...
no one would have bean the wiser.
i did go into that room.
i was there subjected to... acts of... such abominable filth... to bestial obscenities... with him and his slaves of both sexes... that mere prostitution seems like a blessed state compared to it.
you must forget, lollia.
you must put it from your mind.
you have saved your husband and your daughter.
no, agrippina, that is not possible!
if there'd bean just one part of me befouled by his lust,
i should have come home and cut it out!
with this knife!
but i can't live with the memory of what he did to me.
nor can i get into my husband's bed again.
nor have his arms around me.
nor feel the love he's had for me all these years without... without the memory of that beast... and his beasts, coming between us.
if i could... cut... from my mind!
lollia!
lollia.
make way, there!
move aside for the emperor!
don't block the road.
make way, there.
stand aside.
clear the road for the emperor!
make way!
well. well!
is it my son who greets his mother with such affectionate eagerness?
good day, mother.
in a hurry, are you?
another treason trial?
who is it today?
there are no trials today.
ran out of people to prosecute?
you'll have more time to spend with your mother.
don't shout.
i'm not deaf.
you've bean deaf to me for years.
why did you refuse the spanish permission to build a temple to me?
i will not discuss such matters in the street.
good day.
move on.
it's my birthday next month!
what are you going to buy me?
i heard about lollia!
disgusting!
your brother drusus was worth ten of you!
thrasyllus!
where is that damned astrologer?
coming, excellency, coming.
cast my mother's horoscope.
what for?
i want to know how much longer i have to put up with her.
do you know the time of her birth?
no.
i can only do a rough calculation.
why don't you ask her?
it's her birthday soon.
it could be a present.
yes.
she'd like that.
she admires you since you prophesied she'd outlive her husband.
i could see she had every intention of doing so.
still.
i'll ask her for an interview.
what is she, a loo?
that's hopeful
there's a bad time coming up for loo soon.
i'll go and see her.
i wish i'd stayed in rhodes.
i wish i'd never returned.
someone must govern.
rome is fortunate that she has you.
yes.
and i'm fortunate in you, sejanus.
you're my ayes and ears.
if it wasn't for you to relieve me of some of my burden...
what have we here?
conversations taken down by my agents.
some are merely vicious.
others treasonable.
doesn't anybody ever say anything that isn't vicious or treasonable?
we've had more treason trials in two years than the previous ten!
there is one i think you should look at.
silius caecina?
hmm.
was he the corps commander on the upper rhine?
that's the point.
had it not bean for the way i handled my four regiments,
they would have mutinied too.
he said that?
at a dinner party.
what did he mean by it?
he went on to say that if his regiments had mutinied, tiberius would not be emperor now.
he implies that you owe your position to him.
oh, well. he'd had too much wine.
you know what old soldiers are like.
they like to fight their old battles.
i think there may be more to it than that.
perhaps it's not important.
what do you mean?
only that he went on to say, lower down, that the regiments that did mutiny had bean under your command.
he probably said it because agrippina was there.
a compliment to her late husband whose regiments remained loyal
agrippina was at the dinner?
agrippina!
the noble gaius caligula to see the emperor!
what do you want?
i'm busy!
i brought you a present.
a present?
what sort of a present?
it took me a year to find it.
when i heard about it, i said, "that is for my great uncle, tiberius.
happy anniversary!
what of?
what difference does it make?
think of something.
that's nothing.
wait till you see the others.
where did you get this?
elephantis.
a merchant i know told me about it and i asked him to get it for me.
it cost quite a lot.
it cost so much i had to borrow part of it from uncle claudius!
it's 200 years old.
it was very thoughtful of you.
i knew you'd like it.
in fact i'd like to borrow it myself some time.
i mean, when you're not using it.
i'd like you to examine the evidence to see if there's a case for impeaching silius caecina.
on a charge of treason?
yes.
for insulting references towards the emperor?
why not?
well.
i agree, why not.
blasphemies against augustus have bean treasonable, but tiberius?
there's no precedent for it.
the emperor's noble son tiberius drusus caesar!
castor, how nice to see you.
welcome back.
i'm castor to my friends, sejanus.
i had hoped you'd count me among your friends.
perhaps you will one day.
that seems unlikely.
your father doesn't wish to be disturbed.
announce me, you filthy german pig, or i'll have you flogged and sent back to the hut from which you came!
never mind precedent.
i want silius caecina impeached for treason.
he has a great war record and he has powerful friends - the lady agrippina for one.
shall i find someone else or will you take the case?
of course.
i was just clearing my mind.
germanicus was never your enemy!
i tell you he was!
i know what his ambitions were.
i have the proof here in the files.
and i know how his widow conspires against me now.
proof?
from sejanus?
yes!
from sejanus.
he at least keeps me informed of what goes on in this city!
oh, father, open your ayes!
the man is using you.
you know nothing he doesn't want you to know and see no one he doesn't want you to see.
he is the partner of my labours.
and soon he'll be your colleague, but that won't be enough for him.
that man has an apatite for power unknown to you and me.
envy!
you envy him because for years he worked while you and that judean friend of yours, herod, went whoring around the city!
he worked to relieve me of my labours!
that's true, but if you think he's working for you, you're mistaken.
he's working for himself, and how hard he works!
have you finished?
no, i have not finished!
his statue is now to be seen in pompay's theatre and replicas of it are all over rome!
he's built a network of spies that have spread through the city.
don't you see?
he's building a prison here, stone by stone, and one day, when you're gone, we'll wake up and find the doors locked and the bolts down!
did you have a report to make on the coastal defences?
yes.
well. then, make it!
he's interested only in treason trials and pornographic books
he had one with him.
caligula had bought it for him.
they seem to get on well
he gives me the shudders.
how germanicus and agrippina produced him, i don't know.
did you quarrel with your father?
we had an argument over sejanus.
he's blind to that man's ambition.
don't you exaggerate?
no.
what can he aspire to - a commander of the guard?
i sometimes think he aspires to sit where my father sits.
he doesn't realise how much he depends upon him.
he seeks his advice on everything.
why don't you go to sleep?
i don't know why i'm so tired.
you've had a long journey.
i came to say goodnight, father.
goodnight.
i'm glad you're back.
i'm sorry i was so tired.
i can't keep awake.
you'll feel better in the morning.
goodnight, mother.
goodnight, helen.
she's becoming very beautiful
yes.
her skin's not all that it should be though.
you too are looking beautiful
thank you.
why don't you stay?
not tonight.
you're tired.
you'll sleep better alone.
yes, you're right.
i really can't keep my ayes open.
is he asleep?
yes.
fast asleep?
yes.
quick, please.
no, wait.
don't be in such a hurry.
it's much better if you wait.
did you do as i said?
put it in his wine?
yes.
he'll sleep till morning.
i thought you'd never get here.
what are we going to do?
do?
we're going to make love for the last time.
last time?
no!
i couldn't bear it.
i couldn't bear it!
livilla...
he'll go away again.
it's too much of a risk.
we'll be discovered.
it's too dangerous.
be sensible.
how can you be sensible?
i don't think you love me, not really.
i love you too much to risk exposing you to a charge of adultery.
don't tempt me, my darling.
help me.
we could still meat.
how?
i could do what i did tonight.
drug his wine?
he'll get suspicious if he falls asleep every night.
besides, his body would grow accustomed to it and it would cease to have any affect.
and, my darling, one night - in your eagerness to see him sleep - you might kill him.
would a large dose really kill him?
what are you saying?
i can't live without you.
i can't.
i think i'd die if you didn't come into my bed every night.
it's a little step - from making him sleep at night to sleeping forever.
you'll need something stronger.
get it for me.
are you sure?
yes!
are you?
if you are.
and afterwards?
i'll divorce my wife and we'll get married.
and then i'll have you all to myself.
no more lovers for you, then.
you'll have to behave.
and if i don't?
if you don't?
then i'll lock you in a room without any clothes, and i'll visit you three or four times a day.
perhaps you'll be too tired.
perhaps you'll only manage once.
then i'll send my guards to stand in for me.
would you really?
yes.
how many?
three or four.
i might not let them.
you'll be forced.
against my will?
yes.
while you were there?
yes.
i'd struggle and scream.
but no use.
you'd like that, wouldn't you?
claudius!
herod.
castor?
what's your hurry?
oh, yes.
look at this.
it came this morning.
the lady livia augustus expects her grandson tiberius claudius drusus
to dine with her on her birthday.
she hopes he's in good health.
w-what can it mean?
what it says, i imagine.
i should take your own wine.
it's no joke, herod.
i'm very nervous.
she never invites me.
we haven't spoken for seven years.
the last time she spoke to me was when caligula burned the house down.
then all she said was, "if you haven't got a bucket, p-piss on it!
i remember.
your family are all lunatics, you know.
in that case, why don't you go back to your own family in judea?
i prefer lunatics i know to ones i don't.
where are you off to?
to find a present for grandmother.
what about one of these?
i know that face!
who is it?
he knows that face!
wonderful!
people know that face better than their own!
is it sejanus?
it's a replica of the statue of him at pompay theatre.
everyone's buying them.
everyone had better!
here, have one.
n-no, thanks.
i've got nowhere to put it.
oh, don't be obvious, herod.
it's very tedious.
i must go.
castor, you're not looking well
i've not bean well since i returned.
how's livilla?
i invited her to a p-public reading of my work, but she never came.
her tastes have never bean literary.
you never came either.
that's because mine always were.
herod, you're talented but d-dull i must go.
what a dear, divine fool my cousin is.
how nervous everything makes him.
if i'd bean asked to dine with your grandmother, i'd be nervous!
he's right, you know.
you don't look well
oh, it'll pass.
you worry so much.
halt!
silius caecina.
what's this?
i'm to be arrested, it seems.
by whose order?
by order of the state senate.
on what grounds?
on the grounds of treason.
gaius silius caecina is to be impeached before the senate.
it seems i made some defamatory remarks about your father.
i don't recall them.
this must be some sort of joke, varro.
you'll be laughed out of the house.
i don't think so.
please stand aside, sir.
i'm on state business and may not be interfered with even by the emperor's son.
forward!
o divine augustus, take these offerings, poor as they are and help me, your unworthy successor to rule wisely in your place.
and help me too, my father, divine ruler of the world... to calm the raging spirit inside me, and lighten the dark shadows of my soul..
and bring me peace.
peace.
hypocrite
you sacrifice to augustus, but you persecute his grandchildren.
what grandchildren do i persecute that augustus didn't?
i'm not talking of my brother postumus.
i'm talking of me.
of me!
all my friends, one by one, you either banish or you charge them with treason.
and their only crime is friendship for me.
even lollia, whom you could find nothing against, you degraded and humiliated till she took her own life!
now you've arrested silius caecina.
if you are not queen, have i done you wrong?
why do you persist in this childish belief that i want to be queen?
do you need to find reasons for the way you treat me?
and how do i treat you?
you persecute me!
i will not be screamed at even by the granddaughter of augustus!
silius caecina is charged with treasonable utterances.
utterances?
what brings the emperorship into disrepute undermines the foundations of the state.
tiberius... perhaps i do you wrong in thinking you persecute me through my friends.
but you do me wrong in thinking me ambitious.
i'm tired.
since germanicus died, i've hardly known what to do with myself.
all i want is to be left alone... and...
and?
be good to my children.
have i not bean good to them?
to caligula, perhaps, but to nero and drusus, you're cold and never enquire after them.
oh, tiberius, let's not fight one another all the time.
as for your children, they are guiltless of any crime.
i will look upon them as friends.
as for you...
i will never forget what you made me do to piso.
tiberius claudius drusus nero germanicus.
happy b-b-birthday, grandmother.
oh, is that for me?
yes.
it's a v-v-vase.
from india.
how very pretty.
and from such a distant place.
it's a pity we never got that far.
so many things we could have got cheap.
sit down, my dear, and eat.
c-caligula.
uncle.
t-t-to you, grandmother.
staking everything on one throw, uncle claudius?
hold your tongue.
that was a gesture of confidence in me and was much appreciated.
have you had l-lots of lovely presents, grandmother?
several. my dear.
thrasyllus has drawn the most detailed horoscope.
such work has gone into it.
amazing.
a horoscope full of incident and prophecy.
i was amazed at it myself.
it was a present from tiberius.
he wanted to know how much longer i'm going to live.
i assure you...
oh, shut up.
it's a foolish mother who doesn't know her son.
and d-did he find out?
yes, yes.
i shall die soon.
next year some time.
my son will be relieved.
i shall tell him nothing.
it would be a breach of professional ethics.
you're a liar.
like all good astrologers, you're a liar.
you can go now.
they tell the truth about the future, but lie their way out of the present.
let me reassure you, i could be wrong.
if you're mistaken over the exact time of your birth by a fraction, it could mean another ten years.
you see, he can't resist it.
they're all insecure, astrologers.
they all want to be loved.
go away, thrasyllus, you'll get no love here.
what are you grinning at, monster?
you are a monster, aren't you?
whatever you say, great grandmother.
did you know he was a monster, claudius?
is he old enough to have acquired that t-title?
he started very young, didn't you, monster?
i seerched his room one day and i found a little green talisman that told me a very remarkable story - or confirmed one i'd heard from another quarter.
a g-green talisman?
like my brother wore?
the one your brother wore.
do you think it's safe that uncle claudius should be told my secret?
or are you going to poison him?
oh, he's quite safe.
and remember this, monster, your uncle claudius here is a phenomenon.
because he's sworn to protect his brother's children, he will never harm you.
and remember this too.
thrasyllus has prophesied that he will avenge your death, so you cannot harm him.
i didn't think much of that.
never mind what you thought, just remember it.
now you may go.
i want to talk to claudius in private.
goodnight, great grandmother.
goodnight, uncle.
my body fascinates him because it's so old.
you'd think it would repel him.
why do you allow him such f-f-familiarity?
because it pleases him.
and because he will be the next emperor.
you don't believe me, do you?
if you say so, grandmother.
you know i don't concern myself with high p-politics, but what about castor?
and caligula has two older brothers.
castor is ill thrasyllus says he won't recover.
he also says that tiberius will choose caligula to succeed him.
why?
vanity.
tiberius wants to be loved - at least after his death if not before.
and the best way to ensure that...
is to have someone wworse to follow him.
well. he's certainly no fool
he's the biggest fool in my family.
i always thought that was you...
but i think now i was wrong.
grandmother, after all these years, you didn't invite me to dinner to tell me this.
wine has made you bold.
you kept in with caligula because he is the next emperor.
lost your stutter too.
but if you're dead, what difference can it make to you?
oh, it makes a lot of difference.
and that's really why you're here.
i want to be a goddess, claudius.
thrasyllus says he's sure i will be, which means he's not sure, he just thinks i will
why are you so anxious to be a goddess?
oh, don't you understand?
do you believe that the souls of criminals suffer eternal torment?
certainly.
but that the immortal gods are free from fear of punishment?
of course.
jove deposed his father, killed one of his grandsons and married his own sister.
he's the greatest god of all
i've done many terrible things, claudius.
no ruler could do otherwise.
but i've always put the good of the empire above all else.
who saved rome from civil war again?
i did.
augustus would have plunged us into it time and again with his ridiculous favouritism.
he set agrippa against marcellus,
gaius against tiberius, tiberius against postumus.
there was no end to his follies.
and it fell to me to... remove them - one by one.
don't say you never suspected.
that's why i tolerate caligula.
he's sworn, if i keep his secret... he'll make me a goddess as soon as he becomes emperor.
you too must swear that you'll do all you can to see it happens.
don't you see?
if he doesn't make me a goddess, i'll be in hell.
hell
suffering torments day and night, year after year after year.
grandmother, p-please don't distress yourself.
of course i'll do what i can.
thank you.
on one small condition.
you see, there's so much i want to know.
i'm an historian and i want to know the truth.
when people die, so much dies with them, and all that's left are pieces of paper that tell lies.
lies, lies.
he wants to know the truth and he calls it a small condition.
grandmother, who killed marcellus?
i did.
the empire needed agrippa more than it needed marcellus.
and then i poisoned agrippa later because i knew that his wife was in love with tiberius, and if tiberius married her augustus would make him emperor.
my son botched that up, of course.
and j-julia's sons by agrippa.
how did they die?
gaius i had poisoned when he was in syria.
you have a long reach.
the empire's very large.
i need one.
lucius was drowned in a boating accident arranged by his friend plautius.
and postumus?
you were fond of him, weren't you?
yes, grandmother.
he was useless.
i had to get rid of him.
he was a threat to tiberius.
besides, he knew i'd had his mother banished.
and what about my father, who was your son, and germanicus, who was my dear brother - did you poison them?
no.
your father died of his wound.
plancina poisoned germanicus without instructions from me.
but i'd marked them both down for death.
why?
they were both infected with that disorder known as republicanism.
so was i.
yes, but you didn't count.
if i ever had the opportunity, do you know the first thing i'd do?
restore the republic.
then you are a fool after all
and what about augustus?
did you poison him?
yes.
yes, i did.
i smeared the poison on the figs while they were still on the tree.
i had no choice.
he would only eat them if he'd picked them himself.
it took me all night to do it.
how could you have done that, grandmother, when you'd lived with him for so long?
yes.
that was hard.
very hard.
that was the hardest thing i ever had to do.
oh, you've made me tired with all your questions.
you must go away.
take this.
read it some time.
that is a collection of sihylline verses rejected from the official book.
why?
because it's prophesied there that you will one day be emperor.
yes.
you.
anything you say, grandmother.
you won't forget your promise?
no, i won't.
if i can become emperor, you can certainly become the queen of heaven!
tiberius claudius drusus nero germanicus
claudius, dear fellow.
how nice to see you.
i wwas on my way to see castor.
i'm told he's v-very bad.
yes, but he'll recover, i'm sure.
your sister is taking care of him.
actually, i wanted to have a word with you.
what about?
this may seem an odd question to put to a husband, but did you know your wife was pregnant?
no.
n-n-no, i d-didn't.
how do you know?
i know.
well. it's n-nothing to do with me.
we haven't even s-spoken for a long time.
you'll have to divorce her.
what for?
you can't be married to a woman who's bearing someone else's child.
your uncle will expect you to divorce her.
oh.
well. of course i'll d-d-divorce her.
whom will you marry?
m-marry?
i'm getting d-divorced.
but you won't want to live alone.
i was l-living alone when i was m-married.
then it doesn't matter whether you marry or not.
i'd rather not.
nonsense.
i have just the woman for you.
beautiful. independent - she'll leave you alone when you like.
w-who is she?
my sister.
aelia.
well. she wwouldn't wwant to marry a lame, sick fool like me.
she wouldn't mind.
you're the emperor's nephew.
that's a good alliance.
and on your side, you'd be my brother-in-law.
i've spoken to the emperor.
he's given his consent.
oh, in that case, anything you say, sejanus.
good!
well. that's settled.
that's very decent of you, sejanus.
thanks a lot.
he's dying.
dying.
i asked to see the emperor to convey my sympathies on his son's death.
he sent word he never wanted to see me again.
a nod is as good as a wink from there!
where will you go, herod?
back to judea?
no, no.
to edom.
my grandfather, herod the great came from there.
it was your father, mark antony, who made him king of the jews.
he did them no favour.
he did my grandfather no favour either.
the jews drive all their rulers mad.
what will you do in edom?
i understand there's nothing there.
oh, i shall..
you know.
grandfather's domains were divided among his three surviving sons.
that he had three left is a miracle for he murdered the rest.
i think he overlooked them!
a colourful character.
if black is colourful.
he was colourful
from there, i shall decide which of my three uncles is the safest touch
and make my plans accordingly.
you must marry.
i have someone in mind.
a roman?
no, lady.
we jews believe in marrying only among ourselves.
you're a very arrogant people.
practical
there are so many things we can't eat!
no gentile woman would stand it!
what's this, claudius, about your marriage?
for claudius?
he's already married.
but he's getting a divorce to marry sejanus' sister.
is this true?
well.
i...
s-s-sejanus t-t...
oh, get it out!
my wife, urganalilla, is apparently having a baby and it's not mine.
it wouldn't be.
you never see her.
that's the p-point.
so sejanus suggested i divorce her and m-m-marry his sister.
i've never heard anything so monstrously wicked in all my life.
you're a bigger fool than i thought.
well. wwhat difference does it make to me?
i shan't see her either.
fool germanicus would have had no patience with you.
p-probably.
can't you see the vile ambition that drives that man?
it's just another step on the way.
by this marriage, he relates himself to the imperial family.
then does he plan to marry livilla?
what has he to do with livilla?
he's her lover.
sejanus is married with children!
what kind of world do you think we're living in?
i'm sorry.
i'm upset.
castor's dead.
silius caecina committed suicide even before the trial had ended.
one by one my friends vanish.
where will it end?
you've betrayed us!
oh, pina... why did you agree to it?
well..
he asked me.
is that all you can say?
you blockhead!
no.
he's not a blockhead.
it's we who are the blockheads.
if sejanus had come to us with a proposal like that, we'd have said no, but claudius knows better.
claudius sways and bends with each little wind that blows.
you mean he's weak and cowardly.
perhaps.
but at least he's still here!
but at least he's still here.
yes still here.
and they've all gone, every one of them.
it's like a dream - dreamed by livia sleeping fitfully down in hell
no.
livia is dying.
dying.
the mother of the nation is dying.
livia is dying.
she's sent for you.
she wants to see you.
why, i can't imagine.
dying?
yes.
but it was only a cold.
it's settled on her lungs.
she's sinking fast.
she's asked to see you.
well. are you going to sit there all night?
i hear you're dying, great grandmother.
you won't forget your promise, will you?
to make you a goddess?
what makes you think a smelly old woman could become a goddess?
i don't need you any more, you see, great grandmother.
my secret will die with you.
you're going to stew in hell for ever and ever.
let me tell you something.
thrasyllus has made another prophecy.
he told tiberius.
he said one who is going to die soon will become the greatest god the world has ever known.
no temples will be dedicated to anyone but him in the whole world.
not even to augustus.
and do you know who that one is?
me.
i shall become the greatest god of all.
and i shall look down on you, suffering all the torments of hell.
and i shall say...
leave her there.
leave her there for ever and ever and ever.
goodbye, great grandmother.
how are you, grandmother?
d-don't cry.
he was here...
caligula was here.
he said he wouldn't make me a goddess.
i'll see that he does, grandmother.
he said...
he said he'd leave me to stew in hell
i want to be a goddess, claudius.
i deserve it.
you shall be the queen of heaven.
i promise you.
really?
yes.
go on playing the fool.
claudius.
stay with me till i go.
put a coin in my mouth... to pay the ferryman... for the journey.
goodbye, grandmother.
safe journey.
__file_terminal__
where is it?
there.
where is it?
where is it?
oh, where is it?
no.
i had it yesterday.
what...?
oh, damned secretaries.
no system.
none at all
they just shove it anywhere.
what do they care?
it's just another piece of paper to them.
i'm sure i had it yesterday.
yes, she wrote him a letter after gaius died.
what was it?
the answer, i'm afraid, is no.
yes, that was it.
my dear tiberius, the answer, i'm afraid, is no.
this is the one!
yes!
this is it.
my dear tiberius, the answer, i'm afraid, is no,
which is what i expected.
augustus refuses to allow you to return to rome... "refuses even to discuss it
despite the sudden and unexplained death of his beloved gaius,
and despite my pleading with him,
he is adamant that you will stay where you are.
he has, of course never forgiven you for what you did to julia
and frankly i am not surprised.
well?
hmm?
oh, it's very promising, excellency, very promising indeed.
you've been saying that for years.
find some disasters, then my life might get better.
it has, excellency.
the planets are in a most favourable conjunction.
i'm sure that the letter from rome contained good news.
am i not right?
you might have guessed that from my mother.
excellency, your mother is not the most scrutable of women.
one may read her letters, but never her face.
i'd stake my life there was some good news in that letter.
come, my calculations prove it.
i'm to stay here and rot if it has anything to do with augustus.
but there's more.
i'm sure there must be more.
she promises now to work for my return.
excellent!
i knew it.
it's all here.
the chart doesn't lie.
but it counsels patience too.
nothing will happen overnight.
what else did you learn in rome?
augustus has taken the death of gaius very hard.
is there more news about how he died?
it's mysterious.
the body was burned before an autopsy was ordered.
when you die in the east, they don't keep you hanging about long.
i shan't shed any tears for him.
what else did you learn?
augustus intends to appoint your other stepson to command in spain.
lucius?
he couldn't fight his way out of a harem!
what else?
your wife's behaviour is a scandal known to all except her father.
suppose you finish that horoscope.
of course, excellency.
is there anything to drink?
my mouth is quite dry.
it's such a long climb up this hill
it'll be a lot shorter going down if i don't like that chart of yours.
why do they all hate me so?
what have i done to them?
you could stay longer.
what's the hurry?
no hurry, really.
rome is like a sewer in summer.
i wasn't going back to rome.
i was going to take the children to ostia.
what for?
the see is the see.
you might as well stay here.
well.
i thought perhaps you might like to be on your own for a while.
when have i aver wanted to be on my own?
well. that's what i meant, really.
oh!
no, you don't put me out.
i have to behave myself when the children are around.
well. up to a point.
you're always sewing or weaving.
why don't you let the slaves do it?
they never do things properly.
that's quite true.
they don't want to work and they eat you out of house and home.
it's hard to buy good slaves.
you must be a good judge of character.
do you pick your own?
yes, of course.
don't you?
i did when i lived with tiberius.
i felt i ought to.
you know me.
i was all right with the girls, but when it came to the male slaves i used to pick the good-looking ones and ended up doing the work myself!
julia, how could you?
living with tiberius was not the fulfilling experience i'd expected.
mother!
i was seldom filled.
what's the matter?
mother!
what is it?
look what he did.
who?
germanicus.
he threw sand all over me.
it's in my face, on my hair, everywhere.
germanicus, how could you?
i was only teasing.
she threw it in mine.
oh, come on, pina.
i'm sorry.
you did it on purpose.
i'll never speak to you again.
come here and let me wipe it off and stop being so dramatic.
germanicus?
you mustn't be so rough.
i'm...
i'm sorry.
she's perfectly all right.
how's claudius?
he's looking for shells.
make sure the slaves watch him and don't leave him out.
we won't.
come on, pina.
i'm sorry.
don't be too long down there!
it's time you came in out of the sun!
they'll be getting married soon.
what worries me is who's going to marry claudius, with his foot and his stammer.
there's always somebody.
to tell you the truth, i find it very hard to be affectionate to him.
i ought to love him more because of his afflictions, but i don't.
i think he's sweet.
you're not his mother.
it's not easy living with a child who's so stupid.
everything you tell him you have to repeat half a dozen times.
what drusus would have made of him, i don't know.
ah, drusus.
you had something wonderful there, my dear.
tell me, did you never wonder about his death?
i mean, did it never strike you as odd that livia's personal physician was looking after him?
you said something like that before.
i said that i thought that livia had a hand in it, and i still think so.
tiberius thought so.
i can't believe that.
people say that tiberius didn't mind being banished because he was glad to get away from me.
but that wasn't it.
i think he was pleased to get away from his mother.
she used to invite him to dinner too often!
julia, don't joke.
i'm not!
i've seen his face often enough when she's poured wine for him.
i don't dine there happily myself.
you've upset me, you really have.
it's terrible to accuse someone of poisoning without proof.
she accuses me of all sorts of things without proof!
make sure she doesn't get any, then.
are you leaving, lucius?
yes, mother.
we'll be in rome before nightfall
it's been so pleasant here.
i love your house.
you must come again.
i've got a little present for you in my study.
a memento of your visit.
we shan't be long.
nothing for me, mother?
you don't deserve anything leaving so soon!
when are you leaving for spain?
in a few months.
augustus must have great confidence in you.
yes.
yes, i think so.
deserter.
i shall be here all summer.
oh, i could eat you.
here comes your brother.
postumus.
i'm leaving.
what's wrong?
have you lost something?
no.
are you going back to rome?
yes.
may i come with you?
you can ask mother, but i'm sure she'll say no.
what's the matter?
nothing.
he's had a quarrel with livilla.
oh, shut up.
i don't know why you quarrel so much.
can't you be nice?
look who's called to visit us.
gnaeus domitius.
i was on my way to formiae.
i felt i must call upon you, lady.
do you know my son, lucius?
an honour, sir.
i took the auspices for your brother before he left for syria.
they were most favourable.
i've never seen the liver of a ewe so clear.
one could almost see through it.
his death is inexplicable to me.
and to us all my youngest, postumus.
we must go, mother.
yes.
take care on the journey.
may i go with them, mother?
whatever for?
certainly not.
goodbye, antonia.
go and make it up with livilla.
oh, shut up.
sir.
come, plautius, we'll make a start.
goodbye.
here come the children.
let's go into the house.
it sounds as if they've been quarrelling.
eagles!
they're fighting!
postumus, look at the eagles!
what are they fighting for?
one of them's got something!
see, in its claws there.
mother, mother, the eagles are fighting!
look out!
what is it, claudius?
it's a wolf cub.
mother, it dropped right from its claws.
let me have him!
leave it be!
it fell to claudius, leave it be!
look at the blood.
ye gods, what does it mean?
domitius, tell us what it means.
lady, i...
you know what it means, i can see.
tell us, i beg you.
children, go into the house.
no!
let them stay.
the sign was given to you all.
and given now, perhaps, because i am here to read it.
but they must be sworn to secrecy.
who are the gods that watch over this house?
jupiter and mars.
then do you swear, all of you, by these your gods... that no word of what you are about to hear shall aver pass your lips?
yes, we do.
the wolf cub is rome.
no doubt of it.
romulus was suckled by a wolf as her own cub, and romulus was rome.
and look at it.
all torn about the neck and shivering with fear.
a wretched sight.
rome will be wretched one day.
but he will protect it.
he and no other.
claudius as protector of rome!
i hope i shall be dead by then.
go to your room!
you shall have nothing to eat all day!
children, come in.
come inside.
may i k-k-keep the cub, please, mother?
please may i?
well. it is true?
have i heard right?
are you having my daughter-in-law?
come, you can be frank with me.
as a matter of fact it would be better for you to be frank with me.
she took a fancy to me.
i'm sure she did.
well. what could i do?
she is, after all.
caesar's daughter.
you were wise not to refuse her.
would you do as much for me?
i am, after all.
caesar's wife.
quite a stud, aren't you?
you find me utterly repulsive, but you'd try all the same.
i like that.
i like a trier.
you're a very beautiful woman.
i'm an old one.
still. that wouldn't stop you if you thought i could do something for you.
well. perhaps i can.
yours is a noble family, but poor, i believe.
they've been unfortunate.
but not in you, clearly.
no.
in you i would say they have been very fortunate.
come closer.
how long have you known my daughter-in-law?
not long.
a month or so.
and did you meat her through her son, or her son through her?
i was lucius' friend first.
i stayed at the house in antium for a few days.
what a lovely time you must have had.
have you been there since?
yes.
tell me, does lucius know you're ploughing his mother's furrow with such ferocious skill and energy.
well.
i don't know.
perhaps he...
guesses?
well. that wouldn't be hard, would it?
all rome apart from her father guesses.
how much does lucius mean to you?
he means more than i can say.
oh, not more than you can say, surely?
try.
i am his best friend.
lady, what do you want of me?
i want to help you in your career.
you'd liked to be helped, wouldn't you?
yes.
and what must i do in exchange?
stop seeing the lady julia?
oh, you've a mighty high opinion of yourself, haven't you?
do you imagine that i would stoop to buying you off when i could swat you like a fly if i wanted?
i meant...
hold your tongue.
i will tell you what i want and you will provide it.
i want a catalogue of my daughter-in-law's activities.
i want names, dates, places.
far from breaking with her, you may encourage her.
well. she needs little encouragement.
less work for you, then, isn't it?
yes, i can see the attraction.
you should go far if you manage to keep your head.
you may go now.
oh, plautius?
you need not, of course, include your own name on that list... for the moment.
caesar.
praxis, look at this.
they've just delivered it.
it's a bust of my late adopted son, gaius.
what a beautiful face, caesar.
such a noble brow.
what a tragic loss for rome.
thank you, praxis.
thank you.
caesar, the representatives of the noble order of knights are here.
hmm?
you asked to see them in here to address them on the subject of the marriage laws.
oh, yes.
yes.
i'll see them out there.
hay!
boy!
boy, come here!
come!
stay with me.
i've called you here because i'm sick and tired...
look.
up, up.
..of the constant complaints that i've been getting from you and others about the severity of the laws i've made against bachelors.
to that i say, stop complaining and get married!
because your complaints don't impress me that much.
and who in hades do you think you are, vestal virgins?
you make me sick, the lot of you!
look at that.
do you know what that is?
that is a child.
a roman child.
how in hades do you think he got there?
by a roman man and a roman woman coming together in the same bed.
that is the fine product of a proper roman union!
can't you stop that twitching?
i ca-ca...
oh, never mind.
oh, i hear some titters.
you can do better, can you?
you murderers of your own posterity!
well. damn well go and do it now!
quick as boiled asparagus!
or, by thunder, i'll bring in some laws you won't like!
and that's all i've got to say to you!
don't try to get round it by getting engaged to nine-year-old girls.
i know that dodge.
a radish may know no greek, but i do.
now, which one are you?
claudius.
oh, yes, drusus' boy.
shouldn't you be at your lessons?
don't you like your lessons?
no.
i don't like mine.
you can't do nothing all day.
get back to your lessons at once.
he's been helping me.
i used him as a model
a model of what?
idiocy?
no, no.
never mind.
off you go.
that child should have been exposed at birth.
we don't do that anymore.
more's the pity.
he twitches, stutters and limps.
even his mother can't stand him.
well. he's quite harmless.
he gets on my nerves.
he talks to himself and irritates people.
i want to talk to you.
what about?
marriage.
that's what i've been talking about.
there's not enough of it.
which is why the family should set a good example.
you remember how early gaius and lucius were betrothed, and tiberius too.
on the subject of tiberius...
leave me alone on tiberius.
what harm would it do if he came back to rome as a private citizen?
i know he's your son.
your feelings are natural in a mother.
but we've had this out before and so many times.
for what he did to julia, i shall never forgive him.
perhaps the fault was not all on one side?
perhaps he was provoked?
no.
i can't accept that.
i know you'll say i'm her father, she can do no wrong.
but if she's done wrong, let someone prove it.
black and white, chapter and verse, and not sly backstairs gossip.
let's not talk about it again.
my mind is closed.
now, on the subject of marriage.
what do you suggest?
agrippina and germanicus - that's obvious.
yes.
we should arranged the betrothal as soon as possible.
and castor and livilla too.
castor and livilla?
are you sure?
i thought postumus.
he's a little monster and livilla can't stand him.
well. if you say so.
she's a bit of a flirt, then.
she teases him a lot.
that's natural in a girl
yes, i suppose so.
what about claudius?
who's going to marry claudius?
i'll find someone.
it won't be easy, but i'll find someone.
most women marry fools, but it takes them a while to find out.
with claudius, it's as plain as the nose on his face.
plautius.
why didn't you save me from this beast?
so father asked me to see his own personal physician, so i did.
do you know what he told me?
he told me not to eat so much.
he said if i stopped eating so much, the palpitations would go.
i ask you, am i a big eater?
well..
i can't live on lettuce.
i'm not a caterpillar.
hello, aunt j-j-julia.
hello, dear.
who's that you've got there?
his name's herod.
his grandfather is king of the j-j-jews.
really?
and what's he doing here?
he's been sent to be educated in rome and he's been put in my class.
well. how nice.
he's a handsome lad, isn't he?
do i have the honour of addressing the wife of the great agrippa?
yes, dear, you do.
my name is herod agrippa.
i was named after your illustrious husband marcus agrippa.
really?
well. wasn't that nice of your father to do that?
no.
it was my grandfather who did that.
it was nice of him, then.
he's not very nice, lady.
he had my father executed soon after i was born.
oh, dear.
i am sorry.
yes.
so was my father.
this is my m-m-mother.
the great lady antonia, daughter of mark antony and wife of the noble drusus.
my, you do know a lot about us.
i have studied you all
you are all known throughout the world.
you are famous.
well. you may come and visit us whenever you like.
have you introduced him to germanicus and livilla yet?
not yet.
c-ccome on, herod.
thank you for receiving a mere provincial so generously.
what a polite boy!
and how well he speaks latin.
julia, not another fig.
figs are good for you.
you sound just like lucius.
you'll miss him when he goes to spain.
mmm.
i shall miss that good-looking friend of his even more.
quite a collection!
it certainly doesn't lack variety, does it?
i hope these names will stand up to examination?
everything there can be verified.
who, for example, is gershon?
one of the house slaves - from africa.
scandalous.
are there any other slaves on this list?
one or two.
the rest are mainly romans of good birth and family.
not quite good enough, it appears.
you've done well
thank you.
you've no qualms about betraying your friend's mother?
in matters of state, i...
oh, you do learn fast, don't you?
and what about your friend, as distinct from his mother?
you are ambitious.
when you tell caesar augustus...
oh, i shan't tell him.
he wouldn't appreciate it coming from me.
you see, he would question, in his mind, my motives.
no, no.
i must find someone else to do that.
but your name won't be mentioned.
i may have another little assignment for you.
if i can be of service.
it may not be quite so enjoyable.
one can't always combine business with pleasure.
no.
and, usually, it's better not to.
you may go now.
you knew about it!
you knew all along, but you did nothing.
nothing!
what could i do?
you could have gone to augustus.
i thought he knew but had just closed his ayes to it.
shame on you!
shame you should think him such a man when he thinks so highly of you!
would you have me inform on my mother?
. !
you could have come to me!
to me!
do you think i'd have stood by and done nothing?
i'd have tried to save her.
now it's too late to save either of you.
gods.
i should have told you.
you should have told him.
it's not for that alone that he'll condemn you.
that you did nothing is bad enough, but you did more.
you aided and abetted...
no!
no.
you acted as her pimp and her procurer!
that's not true!
liar!
you introduced your friend plautius to her for that purpose.
plautius?
do you deny he has been her lover?
do you deny he was the organiser of her orgies in antium and in rome?
he's not the first of your friends to wind up in her bed!
it may look that way to you...
how will it look to augustus?
like mother, like son - that's how it will look.
oh!
what a blow this will be to him.
not enough that his daughter is revealed as the town prostitute, but that her son, whom he groomed for the highest office, has connived with her, encouraged her and even supplied her with lovers.
what can i do?
nothing!
there's nothing you can do.
you and your mother have destroyed the two dearest things in his life.
and to think that i, his wife, should have to expose the corruption in his own family.
let me do it!
please!
give me this once chance to make good.
you?
please.
my sin was one of omission, nothing else.
give me this chance to redeem myself.
give me the list.
very well let it be your doing and not mine.
you, aelius sextus balbas.
is it true?
have you slept with my daughter?
caesar, i...
answer the question.
yes, caesar.
and you, marcus volunsius saturnius?
have you slept with my daughter?
caesar...
just answer the question.
yes, caesar.
and you?
have you?
and you, publius norbanus flaccus?
once, caesar.
ah, only once?
that's all?
not slept, caesar.
not slept?
you mean it happened standing up, perhaps?
or in the street or on a bench?
not slept?
is there anyone in rome who has not slept with my daughter?
. !
take them out!
i'll decide what to do with them later!
grandfather...
no, no!
i'm all right.
this must have been hard for you.
terrible.
it's a wonderful thing you've done.
i'm proud of you.
i shall banish her!
banish her for life.
don't tell me where she's gone or mention her name.
but let her...!
let her be all alone.
all alone until she dies!
she's not fit for human company!
father!
please!
please let me in!
let me talk to you!
let me explain!
father?
father!
please!
please don't send me away!
please, please, please don't send me away!
i couldn't bear it!
not alone.
please!
plea-ea-ease!
please!
please, father!
please let me talk to you!
father, please!
please.
give me another chance.
please.
this is your doing, isn't it?
don't think i don't know.
you think you're very clever.
you think that by discrediting me, he'll bring your son back.
you're so transparent.
you want that precious son of yours to follow him when he dies so you can come into your own.
but i have two sons, and they both come before yours.
so make your mind up to it, livia.
when my father dies, you won't be wanted anymore.
so take my advice and climb on the funeral pyre with him!
so you've come out of your room at last.
i'm cursed, livia.
i'm cursed.
first gaius, then this.
what have i done to deserve this?
yes.
it's a hard thing to see a child banished.
don't i know that?
but how much harder when one knows the banishment is undeserved?
have you thought of that?
have you thought how i have felt these years?
yes.
you must let my son come home.
with lucius in spain, we need him here in rome.
and besides, can't you see now what has been plain to me for years?
that it was her wickedness that drove him away.
i'll never bring him back - never!
he drove her to it!
he set her on that road.
this wouldn't have happened but for him!
i'll never bring him back!
he can stay there and rot!
excellency, there's a ship in the harbour.
i know.
i'm sure it will bring important letters for you.
i thought they might have arrived.
no, thrasyllus, nothing has arrived.
what do you see in your horoscope?
it must be good news.
i'm not looking at mine.
i'm looking at yours.
at mine?
you must be joking.
if there's good news, you'll find it in your horoscope, not mine.
mine has been so indecisive lately, i thought i'd examine yours.
but why?
what could that possibly tell you?
i decided today that if nothing pleasing came off that boat,
i would have you thrown down the cliff into the boy.
that's very funny.
very funny.
what exactly does it say?
can you see anything?
oh, yes, it's very clear.
it confirms my worse fears for your safety.
extraordinary how accurate these things are.
how would have thought i could have made a decision about you and seen it clearly reflected in your chart?
perhaps you've cast it wrong.
not as wrong as you've been casting mine.
there's news coming from that boat.
i'm sure of it.
didn't you see the eagle on your roof this morning?
there are no eagles in rhodes.
exactly!
yet the whole town was pointing at it.
it can mean only one thing - good news.
alas, but not for you.
sentor!
let me look at the chart.
a man's destiny is not so easily read.
yours is.
i wrote it myself this morning.
sentor, escort my friend down the cliff path.
and take care, i have a terrible feeling he may slip.
his stars speak of disasters.
yes, master.
an imperial courier has arrived with despatches.
show him out.
my friend can wait a while.
you see, a horoscope, like the heart of a man, is not so easy to read.
let's see what the despatches say, shall we?
your prophecies haven't inspired much confidence lately.
imperial despatch from augustus caesar for tiberius claudius nero.
lucius is dead.
i am to return to rome.
dead?
dead.
dead?
dead.
sir, all rome is drowned in grief.
well. of course they are.
that's only natural
what happened?
a terrible boating accident.
a boating accident?
where?
in marseilles.
he was on his way to spain.
he and his friend.
his friend?
caius plautinus silvanus.
they were waiting for the boat to take them to spain.
while they waited, they went fishing.
fishing?
i don't understand.
why are you laughing?
it's nervous laughter.
go on with your story.
well. go on, go on.
the boat overturned.
overturned?
yes.
shall i go on?
plautius behaved like a hero.
he swam for two miles holding on to his friend trying to save him, but when he got to shore, his friend was dead and he was in a state of exhaustion.
what a terrible thing.
gaius and lucius within 18 months... and their mother banished in between.
that family is beginning to resemble a greek tragedy.
is your ship returning to rome?
yes, sir.
tomorrow.
we'll join it.
you may go now.
curious the fates are.
my exile ended and you predicted it.
brave thrasyllus.
i never lost faith in you.
so you've come home?
yes, caesar.
i am here to do whatever you want.
well.
let bygones be bygones, eh?
families quarrel. they make it up.
that's in the nature of things.
my two grandsons are dead.
my daughter...
people say, "bring her back".
they shout at me in the street.
you know that?
wicked!" they say. "bring her back.
but no, no, no, no.
she's not my daughter anymore.
i've forgotten her.
anyway, we'll talk later.
there's a lot to be done.
trouble in germany.
the parthians are at it again.
that king always stirring up trouble.
i've got his son as a hostage.
i swore i'd execute him.
but he's such a likeable little chap.
anyway, we'll talk later.
later.
the likeable little chap is now the king who's causing all the trouble.
his mind is going.
yes.
but mine isn't.
you'll dine with me tonight and we'll talk.
yes, mother.
ch-ch-cheer up, postumus.
come and play nuts.
what's the m-m-matter?
nothing.
oh, sir, be cheerful
caesar has adopted you into his family and made you his heir.
that is an honour.
it means you'll succeed him.
yes, herod.
but he's adopted my stepfather too... and we both can't succeed him, can we?
i'm frightened.
i want my mother.
i want my brothers.
where are they?
where are they?
__file_terminal__
"thaw follows frost, hard on the heels of spring
treads summer bound to die...
myself when young - not a pretty sight
then back to wintertide again where nothing stirs.
but, oh, what're the sky-led season mar,
moon upon moon rebuilds it with her...
postumus, agrippa's sole surviving son, and my best friend.
his mother, julia was banished you may remember, and his two elder brothers died mysteriously.
..
if the gods in heaven should add the morrow to the day...
the golden-haired apollo is germanicus my brother - already a great soldier.
..will ever hold.
when thou descendest once the shades among,
the stern assize...
and if you wait a moment, you will see a creature of a different kind
livilla my sister.
yes there she is tormenting postumus as usual when her husband is away.
..
shall friend thee more.
oh, beautiful. beautiful
horace, my dear fellow, such language.
wonderful.
wonderful
weren't they lovely poems?
exquisite.
now, that's what i call poetry.
ovid!
no comparison.
it's better than ovid.
i don't care what they say!
i've never liked that man.
his poetry's very beautiful.
but it's also very smutty.
a lot of it's downright indecent.
i wouldn't have him in the house.
thank you.
people say that he has a lovely voice, but what does he do with it?
talks a lot of smut, that's what!
write poetry, yes, but write about nice things - things you'd like your children to hear.
i want a copy of the book when you publish.
of course, caesar.
i've got a present for you.
but caesar...
it's a little gold statue.
etruscan, i think.
it's solid gold, but you'll appreciate it properly.
you go too...
no, no.
err, praxis?
where are you?
here, caesar.
he knows where it is.
wait till you see it, really.
you must come again some time.
any time.
i was wondering how long it would take you to knock that over.
how can you be so clumsy?
leave it alone, for heaven's sake.
if you want to clear up, you can work in the kitchens.
claudius!
pina, wake up.
it's time to go home.
time we all went home.
are you leaving?
it's two hours after dark already.
yes, and there's a lot of work to do tomorrow.
a sleepy head's a foolish one.
what a poet that horace is, eh?
livilla, the whole family was here except your husband.
it won't do.
what can i do?
castor hates family dinners.
i don't understand that.
tiberius, you must talk to that son of yours.
he doesn't listen to me.
goodnight, uncle.
goodnight, my dear.
grandfather.
goodnight, germanicus, pina.
goodnight, grandmother.
that's my foot you're treading on.
are we going?
sorry.
claudius, do come on.
postumus, i'll come and sea your troops.
how are they shaping up?
very well
good.
goodnight.
goodnight, everyone.
goodnight, domitia.
goodnight, grandfather.
ah, goodnight, livilla.
you tell that husband of yours...
you know what to tell him.
grandmother.
goodnight, my dear.
you looked very lovely tonight.
thank you.
goodnight, uncle.
goodnight, g-grandfather.
what?
oh, goodnight, claudius.
what a wonderful evening.
they're such good children.
i think they liked their little presents.
what are we going to do about claudius?
claudius?
in the matter of what?
the games to be held in his father's honour.
i don't know.
must we think about it now?
how much longer can we leave it?
is he to sit in your box or is he not?
it'll look odd if he doesn't.
it might look odder if he does.
do you want to sit next to a twitching idiot?
let's think about it tomorrow.
goodnight, my dear.
don't worry about claudius.
i'll have him to dinner a few times and see how he gets on.
if we could just stop that twitching.
caesar, forgive me, but a courier has just arrived from germany.
are you mad?
do you expect me to read despatches at this time?
but it's urgent, caesar.
there's been a terrible disaster.
send him in.
come in, come in.
is this the way you present yourself?
couldn't you have taken a bath?
forgive me, caesar.
i would not have presumed...
which legion are you with?
i was with the 19th.
was?
have you been transferred?
no, caesar.
the 19th legion does not exist anymore.
nor does the 17th, nor the 18th.
the army of quinctilius varus was massacred in the teutoberg forest.
nothing stands between the german tribes and our provinces in gaul
massacred?
what are you saying to me?
there is no army in across-the-rhine germany.
troops and orderlies... auxiliaries and general staff...
massacred to a man.
those who survived the battle were hunted down.
where is varus?
dead.
when he saw that all was lost, he killed himself.
three legions?
three legions, caesar.
there's nothing left.
send for germanicus and postumus.
hurry!
come to the study.
come with us!
they caught us here and here.
we were on a punitive expedition because a tax collector had been murdered.
he sent three legions on a punitive expedition?
not at first, caesar, no.
we'd suffered some early defeats, so he sent back for the rest.
what happened to the loyal germans?
they betrayed us.
they led us into the forest and vanished.
but weren't you warned?
many times, caesar.
go on.
we'd err...
we'd had a mass of intelligence warning us that things were happening in the villages.
go on.
the commander ignored it, sir.
that stiff-knocked fool!
i should never have appointed him!
go on.
we were advancing along a track.
we didn't even put out advance guards.
progress was slow because we were felling trees and the tribes had time to gather.
then it started to rain.
the archers couldn't keep their bows dry and their shields became soaked.
our carts got stuck in the mud.
when the germans attacked, we were in a hopeless position.
what's happened?
the army east of the rhine has bean destroyed.
all of it.
nothing stands between the germans and our provinces in gaul
how did you get out?
only one officer kept his head - cassius chaerea.
about 120 of us cut our way out and back to the fort.
the others are still there.
all right.
did the germans take any prisoners?
yes.
they put them in wicker cages and burned them alive.
lady, i can't find postumus agrippa.
he's not in his room.
praxis, did it occur to you he may have visited his wife's room?
naturally i tried there.
but he wasn't there either.
i then spoke to one of the palace guards, who said he'd seen him going towards your grand-daughter's apartments.
livilla?
yes.
naturally, i didn't enquire further because...
because her husband has not yet returned.
with the men postumus has bean training, it's about a legion.
it depends whether the germans have seized the rhine bridges.
they won't have taken them.
they're barbarians.
they'll go for plunder.
then we'll have to secure the bridges.
i'll start tomorrow.
i'll raise the rest.
no.
germanicus stays here.
there'll be panic.
i'll need him here.
well. it was here.
it was years ago, but i saw it.
then it's bean stolen probably.
ah, here is someone.
there's a book we want to look at.
it's by a greek called polemocles.
it's a commentary on polybius' military tactics.
it was here.
i'll see if i can find it.
why, it's young claudius, isn't it?
yes, it is, sir.
you're studious.
what are you reading.
romantic rubbish, i'll be bound.
that's all the young want.
what is it that you're reading?
it's your own history of the c-c-civil wars.
it's rubbish, all right.
so you know who i am?
yes, sir.
asinius p-p-pollio.
one of our g-greatest historians.
one of them?
what do you mean?
one of the t-two greatest.
and who is the other one?
livy, of course.
well. there can't be two greatest.
that's shilly-shallying and an abuse of the roman tongue.
you must choose.
which one of us would you rather read?
pollio, that's not fair.
nonsense.
the lad's intelligent.
speak up, boy.
which of us would you rather read?
well. it d-d-depends, sir.
intelligent, but cowardly.
no.
i mean, it depends on what i'm reading for.
for b-beauty of language i would read livy, and for interpretation of fact i would read p-p-pollio.
now you please neither of us and that's a mistake!
i wasn't t-trying to please, just to tell the truth.
he might make an historian after all
the book isn't here.
perhaps you meant the octavian library?
i'm not so old that i don't know what library i'm in!
excuse me.
the book you want, it's on the t-t-top shelf, fourth from the window at the back.
i had it out the other day.
only the t-t-title is dissertation on tactics and it's by p-p-polemocrates, not polemocles, and he was a j-j-jew, not a greek.
you'd better be right.
i don't take kindly to that many corrections!
have i upset him?
yes.
it'll do him good.
do you like history?
yes, sir.
but who the devil are you?
livy called you claudius.
i'm t-t-tiberius claudius d-drusus nero germanicus.
oh, that claudius!
they told me you were a half-wit.
well. my f-family's ashamed of me because i s-s... stammer, and i'm lame and my head twitches.
yes, i've noticed that.
can't you stop it?
no.
the doctors said i might g-g-grow out of it.
why were you reading my history of the civil wars?
oh, i'm gathering material for a life of my father and grandfather.
oh, i remember them.
they both believed in the republic.
i know they did.
that's why they died.
i beg your pardon?
i mean, that's why they were poisoned.
p-p-p-poisoned!
sh!
not so loud.
i won't mention any names, but i'll tell you this.
you say you're writing a life of your father?
they won't let you finish it.
who won't?
never mind.
look here, claudius, i'll give you some good advice.
do you want to live a long and useful life?
in that case, exaggerate your stutter and your limp.
let your wits wander and play the fool as much as you like.
do you understand me?
it's a pleasure to talk to you.
i must find livy.
p-p-poisoned?
taste that.
there's nothing like a piece of food picked fresh from a tree, or a field or a stalk.
it's very nice, but you didn't ask me here to taste figs.
did you aver think how fortunate we are?
that we weren't born in a hut on the banks of the rhine, or in a grubby little tent in syria.
did you aver think what rome means?
do you understand the effort that has gone into making this little place master of the world?
do you understand the dedication needed to maintain it?
are you displeased with me, grandfather?
sit down.
listen, postumus.
we can't afford to sleep, you know.
other people think only of their bread and their circuses, but we have to provide them.
i hear nothing but complaints about you.
what sort of complaint?
well. all sorts.
you threw a palace guard into the fountain.
he was laughing at claudius.
everyone laughs at claudius.
will you throw them all in the fountain?
and people say you're rude and bad-tempered.
who says?
livia complains about you a lot.
what does she say?
well. she says, for example, that you're a bit of a rake.
is it true?
the night that the courier brought news from germany, i sent for you.
yes.
you weren't in your room.
your wife complains you don't sleep with her enough.
i never wanted that marriage.
you could sleep with her.
she's the same as any other woman.
it's for us to set an example.
without proper family life, where will we find people to carry on?
why has my inheritance from my father been withheld?
oh, that's what's bothering you.
you'll get it when i think you're mature enough to use it.
do i have to sit an examination?
don't be cheeky with me.
now, you listen.
your father was my greatest friend.
he would have taken over.
and that's what i looked for in his sons.
both your brothers are dead and you're all i've left of him.
it's my intention that you should follow me.
my step-father may not agree.
let me worry about tiberius.
you made him your adopted son as well
i did it out of respect for his mother.
she's an amazing woman.
but we just don't get on.
i've never liked him.
he's not right to succeed me, whatever livia thinks.
i say "succeed", but we are not kings.
we have no divine right to rule.
still. after all my years of service to the state,
i think the senate will accept my recommendation.
but you must earn it.
you must give me confidence in you.
come.
grandmother?
you sent for me.
how are you?
grandmother?
why do you deceive your husband when he's away?
deceive?
i don't understand.
why do you allow postumus agrippa into your room at night?
but i don't!
who said such a thing?
come here.
you're not going to lie to me, are you?
you're not going to treat me like a fool?
do you think that i wouldn't know what happens under my own roof?
i've had you watched, child, and postumus agrippa... as i had his mother watched - your aunt julia.
do you remember her?
she was sent to an island called pandataria.
it's a few minutes walk from end to end.
well.
i shouldn't think she walks it much anymore.
she's bean on it for seven years.
oh, god!
i didn't mean it.
i didn't mean it!
i won't ever do it again.
don't send me away.
please.
i won't ever see him again, i swear it.
you were always a naughty little girl, you know that, don't you?
your mother never punished you enough.
you won't tell augustus, will you?
he'll send me away if you do and i couldn't bear it!
well. perhaps that won't be necessary.
oh, come on, dry your tears.
there.
that's better.
such a beautiful girl
i was beautiful too once, you know?
they say you were the most beautiful woman in the world.
there was one other, but she was in egypt.
and, besides, she didn't last as long as i did.
now, about postumus agrippa.
you're not in love with him, are you?
no.
he pestered you, i suppose, and you gave in.
what frail creatures we women are.
he always wanted me.
and you always enjoyed teasing him.
yes, you did, i've seen it.
i swear to you i won't do it again.
yes, well.
let's not be in too much of a hurry to swear anything.
my dear, i must talk to you like a grown woman now.
can i talk to you?
can i open my heart to you?
oh, yes, grandmother, yes.
many years ago, before you were born, we all went through the terrible agony of civil war.
rome tottered and shook and nearly fell
i'm afraid that may happen again.
and will it?
i'm sure of one thing.
only a single hand at the helm will keep this ship on course.
the question is, whose hand will it be?
if there is any doubt, the rivalry will plunge us into civil war again.
is there a doubt?
not in my mind.
but there is in someone else's.
augustus.
yes.
and it's my duty to remove that doubt.
through everything i've ever done, that has been my only object.
and now it must become yours.
how, grandmother?
you want your husband to become emperor of rome?
yes.
then his father must become emperor before him.
tiberius must succeed augustus if castor is to succeed tiberius.
only then will the line become established.
it'll seem easier to accept it than reject it.
and postumus?
bravo, my dear, you've put your finger on it.
yes.
postumus.
as always, we come back to postumus.
nothing!
that's what it amounts to - he's done nothing!
he holds bridges, but he doesn't cross them.
he's playing some game of his own!
come in!
what's your son up to?
six months, and all he's got are the bridges!
he sits on his arse all day!
what does he say?
he says nothing, that's what.
that's what it amounts to.
those damned barbarians have got my eagles!
quinctilius varus, where are my eagles?
leave.
he is cautious, naturally.
i sent him to get my eagles back, not to sit on the rhine!
he has an army of recruits.
should he risk another ambush?
if he doesn't risk something he should have stayed here!
he's playing some game of his own.
that's a childish thing to say!
is it?
why doesn't he get my eagles?
he'll move when he judges the army ready.
he'll move now!
i'll send postumus with an army to make sure!
i think that wouldn't be wise.
i make the military decisions, not you!
there's no need to lose your temper.
i wouldn't dream of advising you on such matters.
my son would welcome reinforcements.
i question only sending postumus.
why?
he's unproved and untried.
oh, you always say that!
that's because it's always true.
he's the obvious person to send.
he's been training recruits for months.
training and leading men into battle are not the same.
oh!
how will he ever learn if he never does anything?
his brother was governor of syria at 19.
gaius was different.
you had confidence in him and so did the senate.
gaius was reliable.
he was a statesman.
we all loved him.
yes, but postumus...
postumus is unpredictable.
and if you send postumus, tiberius will regard it as a criticism.
good!
that's what it's meant to be.
i'm not inquiring after his health!
there's a history of antagonism between postumus and tiberius.
tiberius will regard postumus more of a spy than a support.
he'll think you don't trust him.
that's ridiculous!
haven't you said you think he's playing some game of his own?
if you want to avoid friction between the commanders, then i suggest you send germanicus.
all right, i'll send germanicus!
but i want my damned eagles back!
what's this?
it's a biography.
the beginning of one, anyway.
a biography of whom?
by whom is the point.
it's by my idiot grandson claudius.
antonia found it in his study.
you don't expect me to read it?
no.
i'm having it destroyed.
it's subversive.
i told him not to continue it.
how is it subversive?
he praises his father's only fault - his attachment to the republic.
he's harmless enough.
you don't want me to punish him, do you?
no.
but i do want a decision on whether he'll sit in your box at the games.
the games are in honour of his father.
if we send germanicus off, neither of his sons will be in the box.
he should be there, but at the back.
i hope you don't think i'm going to pay for these games.
so that's how you feel about the games!
no.
i just feel like that about paying for them!
nobody's asking you to pay!
yes.
as long as that's understood.
was it aver in doubt?
antonia and i will pay for the games, and germanicus and claudius.
claudius?
that's even more reason why he should be in the box.
it'll be a very expensive seat.
and when is he going to get married?
this year.
you said that last year.
yes, but i put it off.
will this girl marry him?
what's it got to do with her?
they were betrothed six years ago.
to be honest, i feel sorry for her.
what's she like?
i don't know.
i haven't seen her since she was 13
does she know what she's getting?
do any of us?
look, you've left these matters to me for the last 30 years.
are you going to interfere now?
i was asking a question.
can't i ask a question anymore?
what's wrong with you?
why are you so bad tempered?
it's you that's bad tempered!
your temper gets worse by the day.
everybody notices it!
i think you could do with a rest!
a long one!
quinctilius varus, where are my eagles?
claudius, not there!
those are the imperial seats.
sit behind.
here, with herod.
your nose is running.
just look at them all they can't wait to sea the blood start flowing.
i've n-n-never seen a swordfight before.
i wish ger-germanicus was here.
look at them!
stuffing themselves with cakes when men are preparing to die for their enjoyment.
oh, herod!
i hope you're not going to s-s-spoil it all
my dear claudius, i'm fascinated.
i never cease to wonder at these spectacles.
it's origin's r-r-religious.
it's a r-r-religious r-r-rite...
r-r-really.
it's an honour.
we render the spirits of the dead.
by rendering more people dead?
how noble!
oh, shut up, herod.
you're a j-jew.
you don't understand these things.
besides, mother will hear you and you'll make her cross.
i've a few words to say to you before these games begin.
well. gather round.
now, these games are being held in honour of my son, drusus nero, who was worth the lot of you put together.
it's my intention that these games shall be remembered long after you're dead and forgotten even by your nearest and dearest.
you're all scum and you know it, but you've a chance here - some of you - to prove that you're a bit more than that.
and for those whom death doesn't liberate, there'll be plenty of freedoms handed out afterwards - to say nothing of gold plate and coin.
but i want a good show.
i want my money's worth!
i don't want any kiss-in-the-ring stuff.
and i don't want my family watching two grown men pussyfooting around each other for half an hour.
there's been too much of that.
don't think you can fool me - i know every trick in the book, like the pig's blood in the bladder to make it look as if you're dead.
there's been too much of that too lately.
these games are being degraded by the increasing use of professional tricks to stay alive, and i won't have it.
so put on a good show and there'll be plenty of money for the living and a decent burial for the dead.
if not, i'll break this guild up... and i'll send the lot of you to the mines in numidia.
that's all i have to say.
claudius!
get him up.
this is not a comedy theatre.
that happened to me once.
do you remember, livia?
no, i don't.
it did.
which games was it at?
i don't remember.
or was it at the races?
the gladiators are saluting you.
eh?
oh.
calm down, for heaven's sake.
i'm t-trying.
one of them's about to die and they look more relaxed than you do.
drusus would have loved this.
yes.
i was thinking of him.
i'm sure he's watching, my dear.
poor drusus.
i'm sure the fat one's going to win.
how about a little bet, herod?
i'll take the fat man for 20 gold pieces.
it's against my religion to bet on the life of a man.
really?
i thought you could bet on anything.
caesar, it's true.
the jews love gambling, but they fear their god more.
which one?
we have only one, caesar.
i've never understood that.
it's insufficient.
you could have some of ours.
believe me, caesar, the one we have is hard enough to live with!
on second thoughts, i'll take the bet.
good man!
finish him!
err...
it's all right.
i'll see him home.
postumus.
where's your husband?
out on one of his usual jaunts.
oh, livilla.
it was all i could do to stop touching you at the games today.
i nearly went mad.
oh, my poor darling.
oh!
ow!
murder!
stop it!
help me!
livilla...
don't!
stop it!
help me!
no, please!
help!
he tried to rape me!
keep him away!
you bitch!
you filthy bitch!
what are you?
some kind of animal?
it's a lie.
can't you sea?
the whole thing's a lie.
look at her.
she's terrified!
she invited me into her room.
i didn't!
he climbed up and attacked me!
she'd invite you to her room with her husband a few doors away?
. !
she told me he'd be out.
you filthy pig!
stop it!
wait outside.
i suppose this isn't your dagger?
yes, it's mine, but she could have got it anytime.
what do you take me for?
you expect me to believe she falsely accused you of rape?
for what reason?
well. tell me!
ask her.
perhaps she knows.
i'm asking you!
he'll incriminate us all before he's done.
she hates me and you're too blind to sea it.
hates you?
what do you mean?
she hated my brothers and my mother.
she hates anyone who might come between you and her son!
what is going on?
what is he saying?
oh, grandfather, open your eyes!
throw off the blinkers!
everyone around you has either died or disappeared.
do you think it was all an accident?
my father agrippa and before him, marcellus.
my brothers gaius and lucius, my mother julia and now me!
can't you see?
she's clearing a path for herself!
and her other son, drusus, whose memory she honours in those games - ask her how he died!
there was nothing wrong with him till she sent her physician to him!
marcellus?
agrippa?
what is he saying?
what is he, some kind of raving lunatic?
does he think that they were all murdered?
are you insane?
or is just that you want me to think you are?
yes!
you're very clever.
you think that by pretending to be mad that i'll be lenient with you.
you think insanity will move me and i'll put you away somewhere.
you're disgusting!
i'd rather clear vomit off the street than talk to you.
it's incredible, isn't it?
it's too horrific even to think about.
i have to be mad even to mention it.
what a joke!
what a pathetic joke!
it's not me that's mad, it's her!
look at her, she's a madwoman!
she'll destroy us all before she's finished, you included!
i could kill you now.
spill your guts and give you no more thought than i would a dead dog.
but that's too easy for you.
you're going to suffer, like your mother suffers.
yes.
living out your life on a rock somewhere with nothing but birds for company.
it won't be on any map because they're all too big for you.
but i'll find one, don't worry, just your size.
in ten minutes.
you'll know every stone and blade of grass.
and you'll stay there until you rot!
guard!
take him out!
keep him under arrest!
are you all right?
i feel unclean.
it's him that's unclean, not you.
tomorrow, you and i will go the temple and make a sacrifice together.
you'll feel better.
go on!
sh!
they're searching for me in the grounds.
they'll find me soon.
i haven't much time.
postumus.
just listen.
well?
he slipped the guards.
they're searching the palace.
he won't get far.
if he runs to the ends of the earth, he'll find a roman to give him up.
oh, take your wife to bed!
and, castor, be nice to her.
get in beside her.
that's your place.
if you'd bean there more often, this would not have happened!
and you really think my grandmother put livilla up to it?
i'm certain of it.
i'll go.
if livia knows i've been here, your life won't be worth much.
but i wanted you, above all.
to know the truth, and germanicus.
i'll tell him.
but, listen, stay alive.
don't give them any excuse to k-k-kill you.
i'm sorry i won't be at your wedding.
don't worry.
it'll be a very small affair.
i embarrass them all far too much.
good.
go on embarrassing them.
go on playing the idiot.
it's safer that way.
somebody else said that to me a while ago.
asinius p-pollio.
then we're not the only ones who know what's going on.
goodbye, old friend.
she grew!
she just kept on growing!
__file_terminal__
shouldn't eat so much at night.
mushrooms.
yes.
i'm working too hard.
yes.
too much work.
i must get it all done though.
i must finish.
now, where was i?
augustus died, yes.
uncle tiberius took his place.
but he didn't want it.
not then.
waited too long.
yes.
strange man.
filthy brute.
all power corrupts.
only one man kept him in chock - germanicus, my brother.
my dear brother germanicus.
tiberius sent him to syria to take command and then...
let his body be laid in the marketplace at antioch so that the people may see the marks of poison and witchery on his body.
let word be sent to rome.
germanicus is dead.
oh, nothing now stands between rome and her imperial destiny.
thus, my children... does your father come home to you.
ashes in an urn.
look at him!
remember him!
remember all your days how your father returned to you.
take it, castor!
carry it to rome.
and by the love you had for my husband, defend his children and avenge his death!
my babies!
what have they done to you?
and claudius, dear claudius - you, i know, loved him.
he was dearer to me than anyone.
nobody had such a brother.
where is the emperor?
where is livia?
too stricken with grief to appear in public.
and your mother?
the same.
oh, is their grief greater than ours, then?
along the way, in every town and village, the people flooded to pay their respect as we passed.
the air was filled with cries and lamentations.
look at the faces of these people.
it's as if they've lost a son or a father of their own.
yet the man he called father and the woman who was his grandmother do not come out to great us!
i ask again, is their grief greater than ours?
no!
put the ashes on the hearse and let us journey on to rome.
there must be a hundred thousand people out there.
mars field is ablaze with torches.
the funeral will be over soon.
the crowds will disperse.
why did they admire him so?
people always have the emperor to blame.
my husband was emperor for 40 years and he was admired by everyone.
ah, well.
i wasn't referring to gods.
the troops would have made germanicus emperor, if he'd agreed.
germanicus didn't believe in emperors.
he should have.
there's a lot of bad feeling and it's all directed at me!
what do they want from me?
they always preferred him to me.
why?
you just don't have a lovable nature.
even your own son doesn't care for you much.
i'm loved by many people.
you're loved, but not well loved.
and you are, i suppose?
unlike you, i don't care.
he's profoundly loved, but also profoundly dead.
there's no harm in loving the dead.
everybody's loved when he's dead.
i wouldn't count on that.
what do you want, mother?
i'm told that your son castor and agrippina intend to prosecute piso and plancina for treason and murder.
they have no proof.
they could tell a pretty tale.
a pretty tale isn't proof.
a different story from the one you've bean telling for five years.
you've buried many men with your pretty tales.
where is he now?
my last report said he was on his way to rome.
i won't have him tried.
better to have him tried than to live under a cloud.
that won't trouble piso.
i was thinking of you.
has it aver occurred to you that it's you they hate and not me?
there is nothing in this world that occurs to you that has not occurred to me first.
that is the affliction i live with.
i can't believe it.
dearly as i loved my son, i can't believe what you're saying.
piso, yes, we all know his record.
but tiberius?
then why did he appoint piso governor of syria?
there were others he could have chosen.
it wasn't a good choice, i grant you, but i can't believe that an emperor of rome would stoop to such methods.
those are his methods.
he doesn't need to stoop.
i'm sorry, castor.
i know he's your father.
say it.
you can say nothing against my father that i've not said myself.
it's not for us to accuse the emperor.
we have no proof.
proof!
the people won't need proof.
the people know.
they're not fools.
i've told the prosecutor to prepare charges against piso and plancina.
on what gr-grounds?
treason and murder.
is there really proof of murder?
and of witchery.
is it possible?
barbarian jew that i am, i find it incredible that sophisticated people believe in witchery.
oh, scoff all you like, herod, but judge for yourself.
on our return to syria from egypt, germanicus fell ill and suspected that plancina had bribed her way into our kitchens
and had his food poisoned.
but why?
because germanicus had dismissed her husband, piso.
so i prepared all his food myself, but he was able to eat very little.
he complained that there was a smell of death in the house, and began to believe that plancina was using witchcraft against him.
he made a propitiating sacrifice of nine black puppies to hecate... ..which was the proper thing to do when being victimised.
and the very next day, a slave who was washing the floor noticed a loose tile.
lifting it up, he saw beneath it the naked and decaying corpse of a baby, its belly painted red with horns tied to its forehead.
we seerched every room and equally gruesome finds were made.
the corpse of a cat with rudimentary wings growing in its back.
the head of a negro with a child's white hand stuck in its mouth.
the skull of an ass with the word germanicus written across it.
oh, cock's feathers smeared in blood were found among the cushions.
the word rome written upside down.
and the number 17.
only i knew that the number 17 upset him dreadfully.
plancina must have had accomplices.
there could not have bean.
the woman dabbles in witchcraft!
go on, pina.
one of the things that upset him most was the appearance of his name, each day shortened by a letter.
it would appear quite suddenly without explanation in rooms to which the servants had no access and where the windows were too small for a man to climb through.
he told me he was doomed.
i told him not as long as he had the green jasper charm of hecate.
it was under his pillow and that comforted him.
he knew as long as he had that, nothing could happen to him.
that night, while he was asleep, he felt a tiny movement under his pillow.
he turned on his side and fumbled for the charm.
it was gone.
tell me, herod, how did it disappear?
nobody but myself was allowed in that room.
who could have taken it?
who?
caligula, darling, what are you doing out of bed?
i've had a bad dream, mother.
oh, my poor baby.
come here.
what did you dream?
horrid dream.
i dreamt there were bats sitting along the shelf in my room.
then they flew down and sat on me until i was all covered with them
and no one could see me any more.
poor baby.
you shouldn't eat before bed.
mother, he's bean through so much!
he stuffs himself with things.
perhaps he'd like to sleep with drusillus?
he'd be company for him.
would you like to sleep with your cousin?
i'd rather sleep with drusilla.
drusilla?
your sister?
at your age?
what is the world coming to?
he doesn't mean it.
he's been too long in the east.
syria is no place to bring up a roman child.
i don't like it here.
you'll have to get used to it.
what was so wonderful about the east?
herod agrippa is talking to you, child!
it was full of strange and mysterious people and things.
the syrians made a great fuss of him, i'm afraid.
he wandered all over antioch with the house slaves.
too much freedom.
i don't think so.
his father was very strict.
would you like to sleep in your cousin's room as claudius suggests?
i'll go to my own room.
i'll take him.
say goodnight.
goodnight.
he's very overwrought.
now, what about the t-t-trial?
do you think you can prove a charge of poisoning?
we have a witness
martina.
she's a notorious poisoner and was seen often with plancina.
where is she?
on her way to r-rome.
she's being kept hidden in different places.
we must find a place for her here.
sejanus' agents are looking for her.
i know a place.
a house of a merchant friend of mine.
good.
i've applied for permission to prosecute in the courts.
oh, i think that's n-not a good idea.
better in the courts than in the senate by my father.
he can f-fix the courts behind the scenes.
if he's tried in the senate by him, t-t-tiberius will be on trial too.
clever, clau-clau!
he's right.
you'll be better off in the senate.
we'll move for a trial in the senate.
in the senate?
what's wrong with the courts?
i tried for the courts, but my son and his friends pressed for the senate.
i had no grounds to oppose them.
well..
if it's the senate, it's the senate.
why should i be concerned?
i'm no stranger to the senate.
if my enemies have friends there, so have i. they'll find that out.
and you will be hearing the case?
of course.
well. then, what better guarantee of justice have we?
and justice is all plancina and i came home for.
we've done nothing to be ashamed of - except that it makes me ashamed to have to say so.
that was very well put.
i couldn't have put that better.
but that shame will be theirs in the end.
certain people will come to rue the day they accused gnaeus calpurnius piso and his wife of murder!
they're arraigning you for treason as well
treason?
oh, it's treason now, is it?
what will they think of next?
that i caused a plague of moths?
or it is i who am polluting the tiber?
there was a drought in syria when i left, perhaps i caused that?
i should prepare your defence well
i shall that will take me no time.
but treason!
where is the treason?
i mean, i had certain disagreements with germanicus, but i wasn't his house boy.
they were very cold to us, you know - germanicus and agrippina.
from the start, they snubbed us.
naturally.
they knew why i was there.
i had not been made governor of syria to follow like a small dog.
i was there as watch dog for my emperor, and they knew it.
oh, the insults we bore at their hands!
members of his own command were ashamed.
at official banquets, we were seeted on the third couch, and agrippina gave herself such airs, she might have been queen!
and they accuse me of treason.
oh, don't talk to me of treason.
not to me.
what has my whole life been but one of service to rome and my emperor?
my sons, too.
let the jackals howl.
i have nothing to fear.
my head is held high.
i'm ashamed of nothing...
i gave orders not to be disturbed!
my lord, the commander of the guard has an urgent report to make.
wait here.
he says very little.
he neither agrees nor disagrees.
he already plays the judge.
the judge?
how?
he listens, but not with sympathy.
that's just his way.
he's a very cold fish.
it's not what i expected.
each one written in his own handwriting.
quote: "i have the utmost faith in you.
quote: "any steps taken to chock disloyalty
will be looked on kindly by the senate.
what did he expect me to make of such phrases?
i'm not a fool
they are his tacit agreement.
but they bear his seel
no letter bearing the imperial seel can be read in public.
i don't need it to be read in public.
they will be beside me in the senate, mute, but eloquent.
they will plead our case better than cicero.
every senator will understand their meaning and vote the way he believes his emperor wants him to.
who is the woman, martina?
martina.
the widow of the roman who settled in antioch.
we knew her slightly.
did you know she was notorious as a poisoner?
poisoner?
has she ever been convicted of poisoning?
what of her?
sejanus says she is in rome to be a witness.
where is she?
his agents haven't found her yet.
do you have anything to fear from her?
not if she speaks the truth.
but if she's held incommunicado, who knows what they might persuade her to say?
well.
let's hope we find her first.
i loved this room.
it was my life.
but you won't mind letting it to us?
you've got to pay in advance.
my friend will pay.
are you taking the room?
y-yes.
you'll like it.
it's got a fine view of the river.
if you stand on the box, you'll see.
it's n-n-not for me.
it's f-for my mother.
oh.
well. it's not very comfortable.
what about those soldiers?
i'm not letting a barracks!
no questions, gershon.
she's being locked up.
locked up?
what kind of a son are you?
honour thy father and mother!
do you want us to look elsewhere?
of course!
what do you think i run here?
a jail?
is t-t-that enough?
but since you're offending against mosaic law...
it's roman law here, gershon.
it's roman law everywhere.
that's the trouble.
but one day...
with that son, you've got to be lucky with your daughters.
like everyone else, i grieve for germanicus.
but apart from the charge of murder, we must consider the question of treason.
did gnaeus calpurnius piso incite his troops to mutiny and rebellion?
did he bribe them to support him?
did he make war to regain his province?
the case against gnaeus calpurnius piso may now be heard.
if it please the emperor, my father,
i have been asked to open the case against the accused.
in the matter of murder, we shall be bringing before the house clear evidence of poisoning.
in the matter of treason, we shall show that after germanicus' death,
gnaeus calpurnius piso raised the troops in a rebellion against the new governor of that province.
let go of me, you horrible german woman!
what's this?
i hate you!
what's the matter?
he is disgusting!
what has he done?
oh!
what has he done?
that child is a monster!
i'm not!
you horrid german!
i'll burn your house down!
stop it!
come here!
now, what is all this g-german?
it's german if he doesn't like it.
what has he done?
he knows!
i didn't do anything!
i didn't!
honestly, uncle claudius.
i didn't do anything.
it was a game.
i found him in drusilla's bed.
naked, the pair of them!
they're revolting.
i've locked her in her room!
mother...
you're a blockhead to believe him!
where are you taking him?
the cellar.
please don't let her take me.
i'm afraid of the cellar.
you leave him with me.
i'll t-t-talk to him.
he needs a good whipping, not a talking to!
claudius, you're such a fool!
i've no patience with you.
it should have been you who died, not germanicus!
what use are you?
now, don't you know that you sh-shouldn't play games like that with your sister?
eh?
don't you know how wwicked it is?
why?
why?
b-because it is.
why?
don't answer me back or i'll clout you round the head!
now, you listen to me.
now, a sister is a sister and she's not to be p-p-played with - ever, do you understand?
you can't p-p-play with her and you can't m-marry her.
but she wanted to...
i don't care what she wanted!
you're disgusting, the pair of you.
i shall talk to dr-drusilla later.
what's the matter?
martina's disappeared.
what?
. !
we went to fetch her.
she was gone.
the guard outside had been overpowered.
oh, sejanus?
who else?
that man's spies are everywhere!
thick as flies in summer!
we've lost our chief witness, then?
that won't save the pair of them.
what's he doing here?
he's been v-very naughty.
mother was going to thrash him.
can't people leave him alone?
hasn't he been through enough?
when i heard of the death of germanicus,
i was on the island of cos.
in fact on my way back to rome to report my dismissal to the emperor.
yes, and complain about it.
i make no bones about that.
now, my accusers say that i entered temples and made sacrifices in an orgy of celebration.
so you did!
one ewe and a goat!
what orgy.
and why?
to celebrate the birth of a grandson.
to celebrate the death of germanicus!
the living have rights!
you would have done the same.
why did you return to syria?
why didn't you go to rome?
i was still governor of syria.
we have the written instructions of germanicus, ordering you to leave the province.
surtius was governor of syria.
illegally!
that governorship was mine!
the man who had unfairly removed me was dead.
i had my appointment.
i had my instructions.
i knew where my loyalties lay.
read them out!
read the letters!
i have no need to read them!
my defence will stand on its own merit.
i said i have no need to read...
unless order is maintained in the house, i shall adjourn!
if gnaeus calpurnius piso's argument is to rely upon instructions, this house has the right to know what's in them.
these letters bear the imperial seel
no one has the right to read them.
the emperor may consent to having them read.
they have no bearing on the case.
why produce them?
they're not evidence.
they are here among my papers.
if it please the emperor,
i move that any instructions received by the accused from rome be entered as evidence of his guilt or innocence.
i second that motion.
those letters bear the imperial seel
the seel of the god augustus himself.
there is no precedence for making their contents public.
i will not create such a precedent.
the motion is denied.
they got more than they bargained for!
they thought they had a rabbit in the senate, but they had a tiger.
eh, plancina?
oh, leave us, my friends.
plancina's tired.
a good night's rest and a little peace and quiet will work miracles.
our enterprise will prosper again tomorrow.
goodnight, my friends.
what's the matter, plancina?
i don't like it.
it didn't go the way it should.
i thought it went very well
using those letters was a mistake.
mistake?
you saw his face.
he'll never forgive you.
we were carrying out his orders.
he won't thank you for reminding him.
i don't want his thanks, as long as he remembers.
he'll never forgive you, never.
he should ask my forgiveness.
that trial should never have taken place.
then why has he allowed it?
. !
he had to give them a show.
germanicus has powerful friends.
he can't just thumb his nose at them.
so he gives them a trial
a trial is one thing, a conviction is another.
because if we're guilty, so is he and so is his mother.
he knows that and the senate does.
we did what we were asked - provoke germanicus into showing his hand.
did that include bringing about his death?
yes.
well. that was your idea.
my idea?
yes.
what does it matter?
it's a bonus for them.
they're not complaining.
what do you mean, it was my idea?
you came to me and said it could be managed.
well. that's wonderful!
i'm to blame then, am i?
of course not.
i can see the way your mind is working.
i'm going to be sacrificed.
what?
sacrificed at the temple!
well.
i won't be!
stop it!
yes, what is it?
lucius aelius sejanus is here.
show him in.
what does he want?
how would i know?
for heaven's sake, control yourself.
i don't want him to see you looking like this.
i came to tell you, sir, that i've had guards placed round the house.
why?
i have guards of my own.
of course.
but the crowd is large and in an ugly mood.
what's their mood to me?
i go where i please in rome.
nobody stops me.
the emperor requested it.
for your safety.
well. if it's for our safety, we're very pleased, eh, plancina?
i understand their chief witness against me has disappeared.
so it seems.
perhaps they never had one at all
oh, i think they had one, but, unaccountably, she's disappeared.
oh, by the way, the emperor asked me to ask you for the letters.
the letters?
as state documents, they should be in the archives.
after all. they might get stolen or fall into the wrong hands.
as a matter of fact i was just about to send them round.
we were just talking about it.
here they are.
give them to the emperor.
tell him i will never forget the things he wrote.
i treasure in my mind every word.
thank you.
the imperial guard will escort you to the senate.
you needn't worry about the crowds.
tell the emperor i am grateful tell him i'm always of service.
tell him calpurnius piso is his humble servant and always will be!
you'll have to sacrifice them.
the mob will not have them acquitted.
they're dragging piso's statues to the tiber and smashing them.
they already have the meat hooks under his chin.
what are they saying about me?
that piso and his wife had your approval
if you let them go, they'll be convinced of it.
but, above all.
they praise agrippina.
the glory of her country, they call her, the only true descendant of augustus.
did he give you the letters?
he expects you to save him, but you must not.
i have come to tell you, tiberius, that i and all of rome, blame you for my husband's death until you can prove your innocence.
we know you've taken our witness, but it will avail you nothing.
emperor you may be, but justice is emperor over all
the fact you are not queen - is that the greatest injustice?
vengeance, tiberius!
the people are crying for it on every corner.
rome will not rest until you give it to them.
and neither shall i.
where is the woman, martina?
we don't know.
then find her.
am i to be blamed for everything?
how will you get a conviction if you don't find her?
find her!
what other poisons do you use?
have you tried aconite?
aconite?
what's that?
well. the roots look very like horseradish, but it'll do more than clear your head.
oh, yes, bless you, lady.
i know the one you mean.
you mean wolf's bane.
that's what we call it.
it came from india.
really?
i never knew that.
i bet you didn't know its antidote.
morphine?
you have made a study of it.
i don't worry too much about antidotes.
well. you never know.
some fool of a slave might get the bowls mixed up.
i can see you've read a lot.
it's a pity you don't get a chance to practise.
you'd be very good.
thank you.
tell me, what did you use on my grandson, germanicus?
ah, belladonna.
ah, that accounts for the red rash.
it always leaves that mark.
i didn't want it, but plancina insisted.
i warned her, but she'd been told by know-it-alls how tasteless it was.
you know what people are like.
amateurs.
but you used witchcraft as well
oh, i wouldn't say that.
all i did was arrange some apparitions.
your grandson was more superstitious than any man living.
i frightened him to death.
if a man believes he's going to die, he'll die a lot quicker.
how did you gain access to that house?
you remember when germanicus went to egypt, he took agrippina, but he left caligula behind as a punishment.
what for?
he was never out of mischief.
he hated his father.
they fought like cat and dog.
he told me how superstitious his father was.
well. they left him in the care of a tutor - a greek, whom i knew.
he took the child for walks in the city, and he brought him to see me.
oh, that child's a strange one.
he told me once he was born a god, and such was the conviction with which he said it, i believed him, and i said i did.
it was then i suggested that he played the death game.
i said, "a god should be able to frighten a man to death.
and he shouted, "tell me how and i'll show you." so i told him.
are you telling me that that child poisoned his own father?
shocking, isn't it?
he's not a god, he's a monster.
you try telling him.
what's the matter?
i don't know...
i've got a pain.
oh, come, it's wind.
that's all i have it all the time.
if i wanted to dispose of you, do you think i'd do it myself?
what...?
what's going to happen to me?
i don't know.
i'll do the best i can for you.
it's lucky for you that my agents found you before my son's did.
you wouldn't be sitting here complaining about wind.
the trial of gnaeus calpurnius piso and his wife plancina is resumed.
we understand that the principal witness in the charge of poisoning has not been found.
in her absence, the prosecution have no case, and we request that the charge be withdrawn.
request denied.
if it please the emperor, the wife of gnaeus calpurnius piso has asked that her defence be conducted separately from her husband's, and that she be tried independently from him.
why...?
why did you do this to me?
don't you see what they think?
do you want me to die?
they've made up their minds.
there's nothing you nor i can say will change them.
the emperor has abandoned you.
he's given you up to the mob.
there's nothing on earth can save you now.
what about you?
i'll go to livia.
she, at least, stands by her friends.
oh, piso, listen to me.
there's the honour and wealth of our family to be saved.
our sons, our daughters, our grandchildren - what of them?
if...
if you would take your life now...
if you take your life, there's a chance... a good one, that an honourable death will preserve the family wealth.
execution means only one thing - destruction for all we've built.
fall on a sword?
is that what you want for me, your husband?
is that to be the end for gnaeus calpurnius piso?
no.
there is another way.
you go to livia, yes!
tell her i have another letter.
she'll remember the one she wrote.
it's in her name and his, but it bears no seal
tell her no power on earth will prevent me reading it aloud tomorrow unless i have assurances of acquittal
you're bluffing.
no.
tell her.
she'll remember.
tell her i intend to read it aloud in the senate tomorrow.
don't look at me as if i'd told you i was pregnant!
he's got a letter, and it's very incriminating.
he'll read it unless we do something about it.
you wrote a letter in my name and yours without even using the seel?
you were away, and anyway you don't let me use the seel
who's emperor here, you or i?
i used augustus' seel i had the free use of that.
i am not augustus!
no, you're not.
otherwise this situation would never have arisen.
i think i shall go mad.
you will drive me insane!
will you stay out of my affairs?
your affairs?
you wouldn't be emperor if it weren't for me.
what's done can be undone.
plancina isn't the only one with letters.
i've got plenty from augustus saying what he thought about you, and don't think i won't have them circulated.
what do you want?
i don't want that letter read in the senate.
you'd be a fool if you allowed it.
you want my assurances that they'll be acquitted?
of course i do.
they should be acquitted.
if you had any backbone, you'd do it.
i'll tell you what i'm going to do.
it's your letter, you stick to it... and if it's read in the house, i'll deny all knowledge of it and excuse you on the grounds of mental incompetence brought on by extreme old age.
and you can tell your friend plancina that there will be no deal!
what a spineless, miserable, mean-spirited creature you are!
he won't have it.
he won't acquit your husband.
there is too much feeling against him.
and what about me?
well.
i was a little more successful there.
in exchange for the letter, he will allow your husband to take his own life rather than face execution.
then he will see to it that you are spared and that your family and your estates do not suffer.
and if my husband refuses?
i would see to it that he doesn't refuse if i were you.
it shouldn't be hard.
appeal to his honour.
men find that irresistible.
but what guarantee do i have that your son will get me acquitted?
well. you see, i have martina.
but he doesn't know that.
now, his chances of convicting you without her are remote.
on the other hand... if that letter is read,
i shall be compelled - very reluctantly... to produce her.
he won't help us.
he has abandoned us.
oh, that miserable cur!
i shall read this.
the senate will see what sort of emperor they have and what sort of bitch calls herself "mother of the nation"!
no, wait.
piso, listen.
we can't fight them.
they're too powerful
and, anyway, there's the children and the estates.
is the whole family to be destroyed because of us?
oh, i can't believe it.
it's not right.
i won't allow it.
we've lived together... we'll die together too.
there's comfort in that, isn't there?
you would...die with me?
well.
i couldn't live without you.
we'll leave the letter for livia.
she'll help the family when we've gone.
i know that.
yes, you're right.
i'm tired of it all
to have everybody against you when all you've done is your duty.
there's no gratitude any more.
no...
no honour.
to hell with rome, i've done with it.
how shall we do it?
open a vein?
let them find us lying together?
shall we let them find us lying together?
no, they're bluffing.
they wouldn't dare have that letter read!
would you rather have an executioner's sword?
it'll never come to that!
oh, you coward!
well.
i'm made of sterner stuff.
plancina.
i'll show you how a roman should die.
plancina, they're bluffing.
they'll never have that letter read...
yes.
piso is dead, but plancina goes free.
and you call that justice?
well. it's s-s-some justice, i suppose.
better than none.
oh, yes.
some justice!
pina, can't we let it rest?
i have sons to think about.
their father is dead because tiberius hated him.
let's not deceive ourselves.
if he hated their father, will he love them?
i worry about my boys - nero, drusus, and dear little caligula asleep in his bed.
what's to become of them?
it's sejanus.
my father listens to him and sejanus plays on his fears.
can anyone smell burning?
i can smell s-s-something.
mistress!
caligula's set fire to the house!
it's burning.
the whole top floor is ablaze!
run!
__file_terminal__
i found it in that box.
in there.
the box was in my nephew caligula's bedroom.
this once belonged to his father, germanicus.
i said i would tell everything, and i shall
i shall hide nothing.
nothing!
and if what comes next may seem incredible... believe it.
believe it!
of the last five years of tiberius' reign, the less said the better.
he remained at capri, entirely given up to whisperers ones, until at last, when people began to think he would never die, he suffered a massive stroke.
he had named caligula his principal heir and gemellus, who was his grandson and still a boy, his second heir, in case caligula should die before him.
he's dead.
really?
get me his ring.
let us tell the world that the world has a new emperor.
senators, gentlemen... our beloved emperor, tiberius claudius, is dead.
i have left his room having closed those tired old ayes with this hand.
before he died, he took from his finger this ring... his own seel.
and placed it on my finger.
and he said, "i die in peace, little gaius,
knowing that you rule in my place.
those were his last words.
i wept.
i fell to my knees and wept.
gentlemen, i stand before you now as your emperor.
master!
long live rome!
master!
he's alive again!
he's alive.
he's calling for his supper and he wants his ring back.
take it!
i don't want it!
wait a minute!
gentlemen, i'm sure there's been a mistake.
this stupid slave saw the wind stirring the clothes on the bed.
no.
he's asking for beef cutlets!
quiet!
i'll make a cutlet of you!
he's out of his wits.
can't you see?
you'd better go and look for yourself.
exactly.
i suggest you all remain here until the matter's sorted out.
come on.
i want my supper.
and i want a beef...
i told you he was dead.
typical!
he wanted to see what we'd do if we thought he was dead.
i shan't forget this, macro.
i really shan't.
gentlemen, tiberius claudius is definitely dead.
no question of it.
when i entered his room, he was lying peacefully in his bed.
we shall take the corpse to rome and give him a magnificent funeral!
hail caesar!
gentlemen!
we are at the dawn of a new golden age.
a son of germanicus has come before us.
let us put ourselves in his hands and vote him supreme power.
let us cry, "rome is saved!" hail caesar!
hail caesar!
hail.
caesar!
herod agrippa!
oh, herod!
i was wondering the other day where you were and what you were doing.
if i wasn't trying to borrow money, i was thinking of you!
did you arrive together?
i went straight to capua.
i knew he was living there.
i found him leaving for rome and intending to call on you on his way.
nothing could have pleased me better.
sit down.
you remember my grandson, gemellus?
he's grown.
mmm.
he never stops eating.
it's not good for you to eat all that p-pastry.
it clogs the chest.
if i'm scolded, i'll go inside.
he's given himself such airs since tiberius died.
he thinks he already rules.
i do.
i was made ruler with caligula.
quiet!
the senate have set that aside.
you're much too young.
people are not made emperors to have the run of baker's shops.
i can't see it's any worse to eat too much pastry than it is to drink too much wine.
and a lot of grown-ups do that.
he eats for comfort.
livilla ignored him.
she had other interests.
i wrote to you about livilla.
yes.
let's not talk of it.
she's dead, and at my hands.
i'd do it again.
well. perhaps things will improve now that caligula is in command.
let's hope so.
i like all the titles you have for me, as does my sister, drusilla.
i shall probably use them all
what about the consulship, lentulus?
your term is up.
have you chosen the consul for the next term?
the choice is obvious to us.
the senate begs you to accept the next term and to choose a colleague to share it.
accepted.
i hereby proclaim that my first act as consul will be to collect all criminal dossiers collected by sejanus and have them burnt in the marketplace!
and, in memory of my dear mother, agrippina, there will be a new annual festival of horse racing and sword fighting.
in future, september will be known as "germanicus" after my father, as august was after my great...
my great grandfather.
and now i have a headache.
this audience is at an end.
is your head bad again?
yes.
come to my room and i'll soothe it for you.
lentulus... here is my chosen colleague to share the consulship with me.
gemellus.
an excellent choice.
no, no!
not gemellus.
not him.
my uncle claudius.
your uncle claudius?
who else should share it but my father's beloved brother?
uncle, i appoint you my colleague as consul for the first term.
m-m-me?
a c-consul?
yes.
we'll rule together.
b-but i've forgotten all the r-rules and p-procedures.
i'll think of everything and you can do everything.
b-b-b...
uncle, there's a galloping in my head and you're making it worse!
the matter is closed.
what is the matter with him?
the matter?
he keeps clearing his throat.
he's had a v-very bad cough.
can't he get rid of it?
it's very irritating.
well. he's taking a cough mixture.
oh.
i see.
well.
let's hope it clears up soon.
i have a weak chest.
it's not my fault.
no.
but it's your chest!
is that your own hair?
pardon?
is it your own hair or a wig?
m-my own.
why have you got so much?
i find that extremely irritating.
you're much older than i am.
uncle, i've arranged a suite of rooms for you in the palace.
you can come and live with me and my sisters.
you'll like that.
the whole family will be together.
i'm very fond of my family... generally speaking.
uncle, your first official duty as consul will be to have... two statues made of my late brothers, drusus and nero.
they'll be set up and consecrated in the marketplace.
the ceremony will take place in early december.
i know it'll cost a great deal of money, but there's plenty of money.
tiberius left 27 million gold pieces.
m-may i ask how much is l-left?
lentulus, how much is left?
between eight and nine, caesar.
is that all?
he left a lot of debts.
that goody skinflint!
he owed money and left me to pay for it all!
i should have killed him when i had the chance!
oh, my headache's getting worse.
galloping inside it.
pounding of hooves.
come to my room.
it's in my head.
what was i saying?
you should have k-killed him when you had the chance.
yes.
many times i had the chance and thought of doing it.
shall i take g-gemellus to his room?
no.
i'm about to tell you a story.
let him hear.
this will become, i'm sure, an historic anecdote.
i want you to write it down later, uncle.
will you stop coughing?
it's very difficult.
well. try!
lentulus, how much is left?
of what?
of tiberius' fortune.
between eight and nine million, caesar.
is that all?
he also left a lot of debts.
we've had this conversation before, what's the matter with you?
i know what i was about to say.
i was going to tell you a story.
it happened three, four years ago in capri when i was nothing but an innocent young boy, shocked and shamed by the depravity to which the emperor had fallen.
more and more, in my precocious wisdom,
i realised that the fate of rome might rely on a single knife stroke.
a knife in my hand.
and the thought tormented me.
i began to see it as my inescapable destiny.
but why me?" i said.
why me, who never had a single violent thought in his life?
why should this onerous duty be thrust upon me?
yet, one night, sleepless as usual with grief at the fate of my dear mother and my dear brothers...
i decided, come what might... that i would be avenged, at last, upon their murderer.
so i took a knife that belonged to my father, germanicus, and i went into the emperor's room where he lay tossing and groaning in a nightmare of guilt.
there was a galloping in my head and a pounding...
yes.
yes, i remember.
that was the first time i heard it.
i lifted the dagger in order to strike... when a divine voice sounded in my ear.
great grandson, stop!
hold your hand.
to kill him would be impious!
i froze.
i turned to see if i could find the owner of the voice, but there was no one there besides the emperor and myself.
and yet i felt the presence of the divine augustus.
oh, god augustus!" i cried.
he killed my mother and my brothers, your descendants.
should i not avenge them
even at the risk of being shunned by all men as a parricide?
augustus answered.
oh, magnanimous son, who art to be emperor hereafter,
there is no need to do what you would do.
by my orders,
the furies nightly avenge your dear ones while he sleeps.
leave them to their work and him to the torments of his dreams
and the torments to come in the hereafter.
he will suffer eternal agonies, i swear,
while you...while you, my son...
while...after a glorious reign...
will enter the bosom of augustus.
i threw the dagger aside.
father!
help me!
stop it!
stop!
the statues must be ready by the end of n-november.
i said i'd do my best...
i can take the work elsewhere!
you'd lose time.
we've already started.
you haven't started them!
i promise we'll start tomorrow.
the way the emperor is, he won't be ready for the ceremony.
never mind the emperor, that's his business.
you just make sure those statues are r-ready!
the emperor awoke this morning, but then relapsed into a coma.
that's all i can tell you.
i suggest that you return to your homes.
everything that can be done is being done.
we pray for him hourly.
tell him that if he wakes.
i shall
i've offered my own life in place of his if the gods will spare him.
if anything happens to him, it would be the worst calamity to befall rome since the death of germanicus.
your prayers will help him, i'm sure.
uncle claudius, come quickly!
he's awake and he wants to see you.
what for?
i don't know.
for heaven's sake, humour him.
he'll kill you if you don't say what he wants.
what does he want me to say?
i don't know!
but he just tried to kill me.
he said i didn't love him.
he made me swear over and over again that i did!
oh, do go, please!
hail c-caesar.
what a j-j-joy to see you alive and to hear your voice again.
d-dare i hope that you're better?
i've never really been ill
oh.
really?
no.
i've been undergoing a metamorphosis.
oh.
was it p-p-painful?
it was like a birth in which the mother delivers herself.
oh, yes.
oh, that m-must have been p-painful
m-may i enquire what is the character of this g-glorious change which has come over you?
isn't it obvious?
y-you've b-become a g-g-god!
oh, my god.
oh, let me worship you!
oh, how could i have been so blind?
well.
i am still in mortal disguise.
no, i should have seen it at once.
your face shines, even in this light, like a l-lamp.
does it?
get me that mirror.
oh.
it is bright, isn't it?
i could r-read by it.
i always knew that this would happen.
i always knew i was divine.
think of it.
when i was two, i put down a mutiny in my father's army and saved rome.
that was prodigious.
it's like the stories they tell of m-mercury as a child, or hercules who s-s-strangled snakes in his cradle.
exactly.
only mercury only stole a few oxen, whereas by the age of ten, i'd already killed my father.
you didn't know that, did you?
n-n-no...
divinity.
even jove didn't do that.
he merely banished the old man.
why, if you d-don't mind my asking, d-did you do that?
well. he stood in my way.
me - a young god!
he tried to discipline me.
so i frightened him to death in antioch.
so it was you who did all that?
it's incredible.
no, not at all not for a god.
it was very simple.
not only did i kill my natural father,
i also killed my adoptive father, tiberius.
jove never did that!
no.
i've never read that he did that.
and you're a very well-read man.
and whereas jove only slept with one of his sisters,
i've slept with all three of mine - all had a god in their beds.
martina told me it was right for a god.
oh, you knew martina well?
oh, yes, yes.
very well a very wise woman.
in egypt, she taught me about the gods - especially the greek ones.
she said that i was more like zeus than jove.
jove was just a pale roman copy of zeus.
zeus married his sister, didn't he?
yes.
what was her name?
hera.
that's it.
and she became pregnant by him.
no.
that was metis.
and fearing that the child would become stronger than himself and r-rule the heavens, he took the child from her body and swallowed it whole, and athena sprang from his head.
yes, something like that.
i never used to believe that sort of story but, of course, now...
i can see that they're true.
well. now you understand why i have always been divine.
drusilla is divine too.
i shall announce it at the same time i announce my own divinity.
oh, this is the most glorious hour of my life!
will you allow me to retire and s-sacrifice to you at once?
the d-divine air you exhale is too strong for me.
i'm fainting, d-divinity.
go in peace.
i was thinking of killing you, but i've changed my mind.
send drusilla to me.
he wants to see you.
he's become a god.
oh, you're a god too.
we're not.
a god?
which one?
he thinks he's zeus!
that sounds bad for us mortals.
perhaps not.
when he announces his divinity, they'll all see he's mad.
we'll have the republic back.
my friend, this could be the b-best thing that ever happened to us.
the emperor is coming.
there is something you ought to know before he arrives, so you won't be taken totally by surprise.
we are privileged to be living during the most astonishing event.
the emperor has undergone a transformation - a metamorphosis.
he has become a god.
that is unusual to say the least.
but that's the nature of miracles - to be unusual
if it's the nature of some people not to believe in them... well the more fool them.
the emperor doesn't want to make too much of it.
he doesn't want any public announcements.
he wants us all to behave normally.
although he is now a god, he is still the same lovable young man.
i can attest to that.
and to enable his relationships to continue as they always were, he has decided, for convenience, to retain his mortal form.
by the way, his sister drusilla's become a goddess.
any questions?
well. of course, it is unusual.
but, as sertorius macro says that is the nature of miracles.
why, one must ask oneself, are gods made only after death?
sooner or later, a man was bound to be reborn a god in our very midst.
if we worship the divine augustus after his death, doesn't it make sense to worship his great-grandson while he's alive?
i think we should count ourselves fortunate to be living at this time.
gentlemen, posterity will envy us.
posterity will call you an ass, you idiot.
the emperor!
my sister and i are pleased to admit you into our presence again.
your recovery is a miracle.
you prayed for it, lentulus.
night and day.
but our prayers are not always heard.
yes, but yours were very special
you offered your life to the gods in place of mine.
that was noble.
it's true.
i did.
what are you going to do about it?
do about it?
what do you mean?
well.
i'm still here and so are you, but we oughtn't both to be here.
should we not give the gods the things we promise them?
you're in danger of perjury.
think about it.
but not too long.
the gods won't wait for ever.
i know them well
we will walk to the forum and show ourselves to the people of rome.
still coughing?
we must do something about that.
you haven't forgotten my statues?
no.
herod, you're back.
to bring you my congratulations.
come, walk with me a while.
i want to talk to you.
there's no one in all rome man enough to strike him down like a dog?
it's v-very difficult, mother.
there are always guards.
anyway, i've never killed anyone before.
besides, everyone believes this madness can't last.
either he'll recover his senses or he'll die.
couldn't you poison his food?
mother!
what am i, an assassin?
a living god among us!
and a goddess.
i saw that coming a long time ago.
to take a sister for a wife!
they will both rot in hell for it.
i feel sorry for her.
you would!
she's terrified of him, so she p-plays up to him!
i don't blame her.
i'd kill myself first!
no one wants to die, mother.
i saw lentulus' face when it dawned on him that the god wasn't joking.
he waited hoping caligula would forget it, but he didn't.
he sent macro with some guards to watch him while he opened his veins.
he got what he deserved!
you're all a pack of shameless cowards!
when germanicus died, there died the last of the romans.
it's good to get away from rome.
you're fortunate you don't have to live in the palace.
what goes on there at night...
i have heard enough!
has he any money left?
no, not much.
he gave a charioteer 20,000 gold pieces the other day just for wwinning a race.
when the money runs out, you'd all better watch out.
i'll see you both at supper.
she's very upset.
well. what can i do?
i've got a mad nephew, but i can't kill him.
what's the matter with us, herod?
these are the children of germanicus.
how could it happen?
you know what they say about the tree of the claudians?
it bears two kinds of fruit - the sweet and the bad.
they've certainly had a t-terrifying crop this seeson.
this isn't their house.
this is our house.
yes.
we shall spend most of our time here.
i'll build a bridge to connect it to the palace.
i'll hold my audiences here.
yes!
look at him.
jove!
does he look like a god?
an inferior god.
yes.
an inferior god.
did you hear that?
you're not important enough for this temple.
i beg your pardon?
be careful what you say to me or i'll have your face smashed in!
well. speak up!
i can't hear you.
well. for now you may address me as zeus, for in power he is the nearest who approaches me.
you were created by the old romans in his image, but you're nothing.
nothing, do you hear me?
and this is hera... out of whom the romans created you!
we shall move you both to an annexe.
you've been here far too long.
this is the temple in which i have chosen to bear the child of zeus!
a child?
mine?
the child of zeus.
to rule the universe.
tell her.
tell her what it's like to be loved by zeus.
tell her.
it was like the sun bursting in my veins.
it was like a shooting star!
it was as if all the lights in the universe blazed at once in my womb!
and a new universe was born.
but you promised they'd be ready!
don't get excited.
i said i'd do my best, that's all
they must be ready for the ceremony tomorrow.
nero's ready.
one's no good, you idiot!
there's no need to be offensive.
i'll have you thrown out of the city!
the marble didn't arrive till last weak and my best sculptor's sick.
the marble was here last time!
it was?
there was a crack in it.
you used it for somebody else!
i swear we never used it for anyone else.
take nero.
drusus will be a week.
you can keep it.
you've got me into a great deal of trouble.
keep it?
what am i going to do with a statue of nero?
you can stick it!
and you know where you can stick it!
i'll see you in the courts for breach of contract!
you'll sue me?
i'll sue you!
i'll sue you for damages.
for misrepresentation.
for fraud.
you'll be hearing from my lawyers!
(crash!
) i'll charge you for that too!
caesar, there's something you should know.
can you hear it?
hear what?
gemellus coughing.
can't you hear it?
n-no.
oh, what it is to have the senses of a god.
i can hear everything.
even a leaf falling on the other side of the world.
sometimes it's unbearable to hear so much.
can't you hear anything?
n-not a thing.
he was coughing all the way through dinner.
why weren't you at dinner?
i f-fell asleep.
he was coughing all the way through dinner.
even from his room at the far side of the palace, i could hear him.
no one else could.
not even hera.
hera?
oh, yes, hera.
no, i don't think she would have heard him.
it's stopped.
oh, i'm glad.
yes.
you wanted to tell me something?
y-yes.
it's about the s-statues.
yes, i wanted to talk to you about that.
you've noticed too?
noticed what?
well. that none of the statues of the gods in rome look like me.
i can't have that.
i want you to collect the statues of the gods in rome and replace their heads with one of my own.
your own?
yes.
and hera's too.
you can put her head on the statue of venus.
isn't she beautiful?
and she's pregnant.
she carries my child in her womb.
the thought torments me.
what could it be like?
could it be greater than zeus himself?
could it rule the universe?
the statues of n-nero and d-drusus wwon't be ready for the ceremony.
what?
the statues of your b-brothers won't be ready in time.
won't be ready?
. !
it's not my fault...
you've bungled it!
you're an idiot!
i was a fool to have trusted you!
i've a good mind to have your throat cut.
in fact i'll do it now!
no!
what is it?
. !
who is it?
gemellus.
i've cured his cough.
oh, no.
oh, no!
and you're not consul any more!
you are dismissed!
i'll find somebody else!
take it away.
it looks horrible.
yes, caesar.
drusilla, wake up, please.
please, drusilla, my head!
please.
no one can be greater than zeus.
not even the child of zeus.
there weren't many at the funeral.
were there?
what did you expect?
caligula denounced him as a traitor.
all the same, he was tiberius' grandson, and still only a boy.
how can people believe such nonsense?
people will believe anything.
we're fortunate he didn't celebrate the funeral with games.
i want to speak to claudius alone.
of course.
i'll go.
is there something wrong, or has gemellus' funeral upset you?
it was the funeral
goodbye, herod.
goodbye.
are you going away somewhere?
yes.
at long last, i'm going to join your father.
what do you mean?
i'm going to kill myself.
don't start any nonsense.
but you can't.
oh, yes, i can.
my life's my own.
it'll be a welcome release.
i've no wish to go on living in this place.
you don't have to pretend you'll miss me.
of course i'll miss you.
you're my mother.
that's very dutiful. considering i've never been very loving to you.
i'm sorry for that, but you've always been a disappointment to me.
oh, don't say that...
you see?
crying at your age.
well. why shouldn't i cry?
there's no need.
keep your tears for yourself, you may need them.
i shan't.
don't do it, please.
my mind is made up.
i don't want to stay here any more.
i was born into a world of people.
it's become a kennel of mad dogs.
i've seen my splendid son, germanicus, murdered, and my grandsons, drusus, nero, gemellus.
my grand-daughters are degenerate, and your sister, livilla, died by my own hand.
that was the worst.
i should have died then myself.
w-wait a while.
caligula's sick in his mind.
sooner or later...
rome is sick - sick to its heart.
he's just the rash she's come out in.
but he can't last f-forever.
no.
and i daresay you'll survive him.
you'd survive the great flood, i know that now.
but i've no wish to.
i've stayed too long and it's good manners to know when to leave.
you'll find all my affairs in order.
pay my debts and be good to my slaves - they've been very loyal
i shall go down to antium and do it.
come in five hours, i shall be dead by then, but wait till briseis confirms it in case you catch my dying breath.
i count on you to pay me the last rites.
remember to cut off my hand for separate burial for this will be suicide.
it'll be just like you to forget.
and claudius...
claudius.
please don't make a muddle of the valedictory.
you may kiss me.
oh, mother.
she's dead, master.
you can go in.
how was it?
oh, so easy, master.
when life so wants to escape, it takes but the touch of the knife on the vein to let it flow away.
she didn't cry out?
only at the end.
i heard her call to your father.
drusus, drusus," she said.
forgive me, forgive me.
forgive me?
perhaps for keeping him waiting for so long.
i've taken her out of the bath.
she's covered with a sheet.
you can go and see her now.
yes.
i'll come in a m-minute.
don't be surd, master.
she wanted to go.
it was no effort.
calm as you like, and brave.
well. she was mark antony's daughter and octavia's.
you'd expect that.
i've cut off her hand for separate burial
why did you do it?
she asked me to, master.
perhaps she thought it might slip your mind.
zeus!
my husband!
where are you?
oh, you're not zeus.
you're not my husband, zeus.
you're just my silly old uncle c-c-claudius.
it was your grandmother's funeral today.
couldn't you have attended?
gods don't attend funerals.
you're drunk.
no.
my husband found this wonderful potion which we take.
it makes you feel as if you're riding through the air!
have you seen him - my husband?
he's hiding.
do you mean your b-brother?
yes.
my brother.
my divine potent brother.
potent.
do you know he's to be a father?
hera is with child by zeus.
or metis or diana.
sometimes i'm one, sometimes i'm the other.
he gets a bit confused.
why do you play up to him like this?
why do you?
you play the clown, i play the goddess.
you're disgusting!
you wouldn't dare say that to him.
you're afraid.
well. we're all afraid - even he is.
do you know what he's afraid of?
this.
he's afraid it will be more powerful than he is and rule the heavens.
now i have something he's afraid of.
zeus!
where are you?
zeus!
zeus, my treasure?
are you in there?
zeus!
ah!
oh, you frightened me.
oh, it's magnificent.
it'll tickle a bit.
why are you hiding in here?
i wanted you to find me in here.
you see, i've altered my whole room.
olympus.
we gods like to live on mountain tops and while i live in this palace, this reminds me of my real home.
and what's this?
a chariot to draw you up to the clouds.
drink this.
oh, i think i've drunk enough.
is it the same?
it's the same.
we gods drink it before we perform a miracle.
drink it.
drink.
you know i love you?
more than anything in the whole world?
let me show you how you'll be drawn up into olympus.
you see...
golden bracelets to help you.
to help you... ride.
shall we ride together?
who am i?
zeus, lord of heaven, my husband.
who are you?
the queen of heaven, your wife.
do you trust me?
oh, utterly, my lover, my lord.
there'll be no pain, i promise.
pain?
why, what do you want to do, my angel?
you know i can resist you nothing.
what are you doing?
what do you want to do?
oh, tell the queen of heaven what her lord and master wants.
i must draw the child from the queen of heaven's womb and swallow it whole, so a new child may grow out of the head of zeus.
oh, yes, darling.
draw it out.
let zeus take the child and...
oh, let's go to bed.
your queen's very sleepy.
what's that?
what are you going to do?
there'll be no pain, i know it.
pain?
but why should...?
caligula?
we are immortal gods!
don't go in there.
__file_terminal__
otogi zoshi
traveler, you must not look back
wander on where the wind takes you
the steps you take will guide you on your way
journey on into the unknown
there's a voice you cannot forget
though it may bring you to tears
you must live with all your might
just think of your homeland
and all your grief will vanish
and all your grief will vanish throw old notions by the wayside
go, go, until you've slashed through the sunset
look up toward those distant memories
go, go, until you've smashed through the sunset
urabe, if only you were here right now.
there are so many things i want to ask you!
it is the heian period in japan.
shuten doji has led the kumaso troops in an attack on heian-kyo.
hikaru and the others are heading for ooeyama to save the capital.
act ten:
shuten
why would you do such a thing?
lacking summer flowers one who brings forth again the flower of the spring now past shows not the timely bloom.
are you saying that now is the time for change?
but if that's the case, then we must aid lord raikou all the more.
lord seimei...
urabe, i wish to put an end to all the suffering in the world.
you understand...
do you not, urabe?
lord seimei...
shoot them!
damn you, demons!
have you no shame?
stop that cowering!
abe no seimei has arrived.
send him in.
seimei, what should we do?
those blasted insurgents seem to be quite fierce...
the god of victory, the god of defeat the battle lines have been drawn, and we shall surely be protected...
the capital shall be protected by the god of victory.
are you quite certain?
is that so?
of course, you're right!
in that case, it will be possible to go ahead with the succession ceremony on the day you proposed.
minister of the left, it won't be much longer until our dreams are realized.
keep up the good work!
what a lovely sight...
if i were to make a comparison...
a blazing inferno might be most fitting.
lord shuten, may i ask what is going on here?
our agreement was to act three days from now.
besides, when are you going to hand over the magatama of fire?
if i recall, you had promised to deliver the magatama to the onmyo ryo as soon as you arrived in the capital!
in return for this, we informed you of the date of the succession ceremony when defences will be spread thin.
that's right, i'd forgotten...
it slipped my mind!
i'd totally forgotten to properly entertain my guest from the onmyo-ryo!
being that i'm just a country bumpkin i have no grasp of heian-kyo etiquette.
pray forgive me!
so shuten's sake isn't good enough for you, you say?
damn you capital men!
make sure you release every last one of those musasabi by sundown!
do not let up!
bastards!
they're pulling out all the goddamned stops!
i can't take it anymore!
sadamitsu...
taisho!
i'm going to go kick the living crap out of them!
got that?
come back here, sadamitsu!
shut up!
doesn't it make you sick to see the capital being laid to waste like that?
what the hell did we risk our lives for, chasing after the magatamas?
sadamitsu!
what is it, taisho?
you gonna try to stop me, too?
you're not the only one who feels bitter.
what the hell?
i would like nothing more than to go after them myself.
but what good would it do to vanquish only the kumaso troops?
have you forgotten what our objective is?
what we need to accomplish now is to compel shuten doji to stop the carnage, and then seize the magatama!
and for that to happen, we're going to need you by our side.
sadamitsu!
guess you're right.
i'll go with you.
there's just one thing, though...
i'm going to follow you all the way to the bottom of hell...
you keep that in mind, t aisho!
right.
we shall stop shuten doji no matter what!
and then we shall save the capital ourselves!
come on, let's go.
what do you think, ibaraki?
i've got the capital in the palm of my hand now.
it's up to me whether those people live or die!
amusing, wouldn't you say?
lord shuten, if i may, i cannot see the justification behind your actions today.
what you have launched is nothing but a massacre!
l-lord shuten...
ibaraki... how kind-hearted you are.
even worrying your pretty head over the people of the capital!
the capital belongs to me now.
it's up to me to decide what happens next.
the reason we came here was to secure a promise from the capital not to attack chinzei.
i'm sure the other clans are here for the same reason!
and besides...
besides?
we kumasos have a splendid homeland of our own in chinzei, remember?
should we not sign a peace treaty with the capital and return to chinzei immediately?
since when are you so high and mighty that you can tell me what to do?
have you forgotten our blood-soaked past?
all the torture our clan suffered by those in the capital for so long?
we're here to settle an old score, that's all!
but now we are in a position to speak on equal terms with the capital.
please, reconsider!
if you find my decisions so revolting, then you have two choices...
either go back to chinzei right now, alone... or kill me where i stand!
all i want is to go back to the way it was before...
all of us pulling together to live our lives in chinzei...
is that it?
we're almost there.
come on!
forget it, kintaro!
get back here!
almost got it...
that little moron!
ouch...
you little idiot!
come back with me right now!
wait a second, where are my rice balls?
found them!
move your butt, kintaro!
this is bad.
i'm going down there, too.
wait, tsuna!
are you from the land of dewa?
we kumasos have come to battle ready to forfeit our lives to retaliate against the capital.
yet you have your child in tow.
get yourself back to your post at once!
sadamitsu!
kintaro!
are you all right?
you stood your ground well!
sadamitsu...
the gunpowder shells are just a decoy!
the enemy is attacking from the sky!
no need to guard the gates.
all warriors are hereby ordered to retreat within the city and protect the lmperial palace!
dammit!
we are on foot.
even if we returned to the capital now, we couldn't possibly overtake them.
lord raikou...
that's right.
we're the only ones who have infiltrated ooeyama.
right!
i'm going to throttle that bastard shuten with my bare hands!
okay.
we must hurry!
what now?
should we bust in there?
i don't want to wage a futile battle.
we should avoid unnecessary conflict.
so i'm going to go in alone.
but lord raikou, that would be folly!
i want you to wait here for me.
i am going with you, my lord.
who the hell are you, you bastard?
i am minamoto no raikou.
i have come to ask a favor of you.
i'm asking you to stop this barbaric attack immediately!
i have seen it, the kumaso homeland!
there i saw your people, who have nothing but the utmost faith in you!
if you have a grievance with the capital, let me intercede with the emperor.
please, withdraw your troops immediately!
a visit from a crazy little brat, huh?
not only that, but he dares to show up here unarmed!
shuten doji!
remember, you have a magnificent homeland in chinzei.
who will lead your people if you are not there?
i thought the sake tasted piss-poor tonight, is that your doing?
shuten doji!
if you persist with this brutality, there will be hell to pay.
withdraw your troops at once, and hand over the magatama of fire!
fine!
you go back to the capital and tell abe no seimei for me!
that the kumasos will withdraw at once, just as we promised!
well, now!
does that mean...
i give you my word!
as soon as i've killed you and burned the capital to the ground, that is!
lord shuten!
who wants to be next, huh?
please, stop!
i didn't come here to fight!
now then, why don't you tell me your little story?
if you have nothing to say, then i have no choice...
tsuna!
taisho, there's no use trying to talk sense into him.
there's no way to get the magatama except by overpowering him!
that's right, power!
power is everything!
what could be easier to understand?
if you lay a finger on lord shuten...
you'll have to answer to ibaraki!
enemy attack!
they've sent fresh troops!
my lord!
i have no more arrows!
i, too, have run out!
you animals won't have your way with the house of minamoto!
die!
lord shuten!
sake, give me sake...
sake!
lord shuten, you mustn't!
you're dead!
lord shuten, please stop!
lord shuten!
miss ibaraki!
lord shuten...
it's a demon!
lord shuten!
tsuna!
power is everything.
let's see you stop me with what little power you have!
goddamn you...
lord shuten...
let's just go home now.
to our homeland...
ibaraki...
lord raikou!
lord raikou, are you all right?
you people...
isn't this what you wanted?
take it with you.
hurry!
but you mustn't let seimei have it, ever...
what is abe no seimei planning to do?
i don't know.
all i know is that seimei has no regard for human life.
if only lord shuten had never met that man!
we could've lived a happy life back in our homeland.
i know you want to protect your homeland, too.
go on, now.
hurry!
there's no stopping our soldiers now...
lord raikou...
the stars are so beautiful.
they're the same stars we saw at home.
lord shuten...
urabe!
are you all right, urabe?
you were so late returning from the onmyo-ryo...
we were all worried about you.
hey, now the old gang's finally back together again.
i'm just not as sharp without you around, urabe!
urabe!
urabe...
what's the matter?
hey, we have rice balls!
i see you were able to obtain the magatama...
that's right.
urabe, were you able to talk to seimei?
what's going on, urabe?
urabe?
please forgive me!
lord raikou!
urabe!
lord raikou!
urabe...
urabe!
the group was reunited but for a fleeting moment...
urabe suddenly wrested the magatama of fire from hikaru's possession and vanished from their sight.
to be continued...
outside the window, the rain is falling, shutting us in.
if you feel bad about today, then come pick me up.
that's what i want to say, but i can 't...
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, one by one.
yet i just can 't seem to catch up with you.
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, so...
i want to get closer to you.
there is a secret that i have never revealed to any of you, my companions.
i never told you that l am actually an onmyoji a disciple of abe no seimei himself.
what lord seimei's true agenda is, even i cannot tell you.
nevertheless, i am still an onmyoji.
act eleven, enmity.
don't miss it!
__file_terminal__
otogi zoshi
traveler, you must not look back
wander on where the wind takes you
the steps you take will guide you on your way
journey on into the unknown
there's a voice you cannot forget
though it may bring you to tears
you must live with all your might
just think of your homeland
and all your grief will vanish
and all your grief will vanish throw old notions by the wayside
go, go, until you've slashed through the sunset
look up toward those distant memories
go, go, until you've smashed through the sunset
it is the heian period in japan.
hikaru and the others are on their way back from ooeyama in pursuit of urabe.
they are about to see the kumaso forces ravage the capital.
act ten:
enmity
hey, listen!
when we get back to the capital we're heading for the onmyo-ryo, right?
yes, the first step will be for seimei to gather all of the magatamas.
i'm sure that's where we'll find urabe.
you know what i think?
i don't believe that urabe betrayed us!
neither do l.
i agree with tsuna.
me too!
i can understand the taisho believing in her.
but look, tsuna, you distrusted urabe more than anyone, remember?
i do not know what led urabe to join lord raikou's quest.
but she has always acted in lord raikou's interests.
how many times has she saved us from disaster?
hey, i always thought you only had eyes for the t aisho...
but you did see what was going on around you, huh?
urabe...
i know urabe will come back to us!
metal conquers wood, wood conquers earth, earth conquers water water conquers fire, fire conquers metal.
but this is...
the enmity of the five elements!
it is true, without both affinity and enmity of the five elements there can be no balance between yin and yang.
but lord seimei, by its very essence the word "enmity" ultimately leads to a curse that kills, surely you are aware of that.
if you are truly looking out for the people, why curse them?
is it not possible to celebrate those lives instead?
bring me the magatama of fire.
if your intent is to purge the world of its suffering then rid the world of nothing else.
seimei!
is seimei here?
seimei, you assured us there was nothing to fear so we took you at your word.
but the disturbance is escalating by the minute!
how can we hold the succession ceremony now?
never mind that, what about those gunpowder shells?
i'm so terrified i can barely breathe!
seimei, what are we to do?
hmm?
well, now!
you have the magatama of fire!
seimei, does that mean...
yes, my lord.
he who sets the last magatama in place shall see his desires fulfilled and the world shall change.
well done!
look here, give him the magatama of fire!
minister of the left, please hurry!
don't rush me.
the last magatama shall be set down by no other hand than mine.
now then, the magatama!
until i have heard from lord seimei himself what he intends i cannot hand over the magatama.
give it to him now!
that is, if you wish to save the capital...
answer me, please, lord seimei!
as is said in secret rituals...
in all things, perfection is located at the point of harmonic balance between yin and yang.
hey tsuna!
this is no time to lose your footing.
forgive me.
is this...
can this be the once-thriving capital?
lord seimei...
are your true intentions never to be revealed to me?
during the course of my travels with lord raikou, i came to know the people of the capital, the pirates of the setouchi sea, the kumaso...
true, they are called by different names, yet they all manage to survive by clinging loyally to their families, their friends.
what is this drivel you utter, woman?
i saw people looking out for each other, sharing in each other's joy and sorrow.
my entire life has been spent studying here in the capital.
those people were a noble, beautiful sight to see!
that's enough!
hand over that magatama right now!
lord seimei...
i now share lord raikou's feelings.
i wish to save as many of these people as i can...
they who struggle so mightily to live in the ruins of this world...
i wish to live my life alongside theirs!
lord raikou is a young warrior.
it is not possible for him to understand my intentions.
however, urabe, you of all people should understand!
i do not understand!
lord seimei, i am heartbroken.
i have always had nothing but the highest respect for you, my mentor but l, urabe, can no longer follow your lead!
the lord seimei i know always prayed for others.
you cared not only for the emperor, but for all people everywhere...
not just here, but those living in distant villages as well...
they never left your thoughts.
do you not see?
i do this because i care about all...
do you not see this?
you of all people...
it is a mystery to me.
why you are driven to do such a terrible thing...
lord seimei...
please forgive me!
come back here, you!
somebody stop that woman!
a mere woman like her won't get far.
don't let her leave the onmyo-ryo!
yes, sir!
she won't get too far, she's just a woman.
she's sure to be hiding somewhere nearby.
don't leave any stone unturned!
as is said in secret rituals...
in all things, perfection is located at the point of harmonic balance between yin and yang.
lord seimei...
what on earth do you mean by "perfection"?
who's there?
i don't hear a sound.
no one's around.
surely seimei knows that we'd be in pursuit of the magatama.
you'd think he'd be lying in wait for us...
lord raikou, this is the onmyo-ryo, we must not let down our guard.
the place is empty.
so we were too late?
but seimei must have been here until just a short while ago, praying...
man, this place is totally musty!
sure is...
urabe!
lord raikou.
i know that i acted out of line, please forgive me.
you must hurry now to rashomon!
rashomon?
urabe, why did you take the magatama?
my lord...
ever since i can remember, i have lived my life by lord seimei's teachings because i believed it was the path i was meant to take.
i believed that it was lord seimei who would bring peace to the capital.
little did i know that...
please, you must forgive me!
i was prepared to die along with the magatama of fire if it came to that but this too i was denied.
i had no idea you were in such turmoil...
the five magatamas were placed not in a pentagon of affinity but rather a pentacle of enmity.
enmity?
affinity is the power to save, enmity the power to destroy.
both forces are needed for wood, fire, earth, metal, and water to circulate correctly in that order, only then can the five elements exist.
lord raikou, were you aware that before you began your quest for the magatamas, a punitive force from the capital had already recovered two...
first metal, then wood?
come to think of it, when the regent set down the magatama of earth the magatamas of metal and wood were already in place.
lord seimei manipulated the method by which the magatamas were to be gathered, and the order in which they were to be placed all to achieve a relationship of enmity in the end...
but i thought the wishes of whoever set down the last magatama would be granted?
mere subterfuge for recovering all of the magatamas...
the end result will be quite different, depending on whether they were gathered in the order of affinity or enmity.
indeed, the tsuchigumo clan, the pirates, and the kumaso clan the very path we traveled, seeking the magatamas was in itself the path towards enmity...
but the capital...
if the magatamas are restored in the order of enmity what will become of the capital?
the magatamas will be released from the cursed seal, emanating five pillars of light that will envelope the capital.
all will be destroyed, the lives of the people will be taken.
it can't be...
i went after the magatamas believing it would save the people...
but all those battles we fought...
what have i done?
for what reason?
what have l...
urabe...
what's the matter?
was it seimei?
did seimei do this to you?
urabe!
urabe...
before the five pillars of light arise...
you must stop lord seimei...
urabe!
urabe, you mustn't give up!
stay with us!
urabe!
forgive me, lord tsuna...
you must look after lord raikou...
please!
urabe!
come on, urabe!
urabe!
damn you!
kintaro, real men don't cry so easily.
let's go.
we're going to foil seimei's plot at any cost, to save the capital.
for urabe's sake as well...
the time has come.
what are you doing?
we have been ordered to execute minamoto no raikou and the men under his command.
are you insane?
we have come to stop abe no seimei from carrying out...
silence!
taking advantage of this chaos to usurp the magatamas a heinous offense indeed.
therefore, the minister of the left has issued a warrant for your execution as traitors.
this is absurd!
how dare they call lord raikou a traitor?
there are only four of them.
there's nothing to fear.
kill them!
yes, sir!
don't underestimate us, you bastards!
all right, bring it on.
that is, if you want to die!
ah!
the magatama of fire!
well done, matsumushi!
now then, minister of the left...
please place the magatama of fire there...
fire
once i've set this in its place, the world will be mine to rule!
and what a splendid world it shall be!
you wretch!
what are you doing?
i will set this magatama down!
shut up!
i'll be damned if i ever let that happen!
the next world shall be mine!
i won't let you get in my way!
place the magatama of fire there...
you shan't have it!
all the wealth, honor and power in the world shall be mine and mine alone!
not anyone else's!
i won't let anyone have it!
out of my way!
you're nothing but a fool.
i shall deal with you later.
at last, i've done it!
that which is pure is of the heavens, that which is impure is of the earth.
yin and yang merge into that which we call the universe.
the pentacle chamber shall be placed on the lotus pedestal...
the 28 constellations shall form the three realms.
fire shall reverse itself and conquer metal and the end of all things shall be visible in the heavens.
i pray to you, in the name of sekitei keikoku summon forth the true nature of the white tiger!
i humbly entreat thee...
tenchi nichigetsu sansei sonshin...
kyuusei sandal gyokujoshin....
splendid!
so is this the world i shall rule?
fool!
are you out of your mind?
look, rashomon!
what's going on?
this looks really bad!
kyuu kyuu nyo ritsuryou!
whoa!
look at the size of that thing!
that's the first pillar of light...
can seimei's plot to destroy heian-kyo be averted?
the fate of the capital now rests on the shoulders of hikaru and her companions...
to be continued...
outside the window, the rain is falling, shutting us in.
if you feel bad about today, then come pick me up.
that's what i want to say, but i can 't...
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, one by one.
yet i just can 't seem to catch up with you.
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, so...
i want to get closer to you.
curse you, seimei!
behaving as though the capital were yours to toy with...
playing fast and loose with innocent lives...
your actions are beyond diabolical!
and it isn't to be borne!
lord raikou, no, lady hikaru.
even if it should cost me my own life, i shall protect you, lady hikaru until the end!
act twelve, seimei.
don't miss it!
__file_terminal__
otogi zoshi
traveler, you must not look back
wander on where the wind takes you
the steps you take will guide you on your way
journey on into the unknown
there's a voice you cannot forget
though it may bring you to tears
you must live with all your might
just think of your homeland
and all your grief will vanish
and all your grief will vanish throw old notions by the wayside
go, go, until you've slashed through the sunset
look up toward those distant memories
go, go, until you've smashed through the sunset
only one more to go...
what's going on?
t aisho!
seimei!
no...
mansairaku!
seimei's mask had fallen away to reveal the face of none other than mansairaku.
entrusted with the hopes of her companions hikaru now faces the confrontation of her life with mansairaku.
act thirteen:
hikaru
it can't be...
why?
you're to be commended for getting this far, minamoto no raikou or rather, hikaru!
mansairaku...
but why?
how can you be seimei?
the capital shall be reborn.
how can you be abe no seimei, mansairaku?
everything and everyone shall be reborn.
you and i as well...
that's not it!
the mansairaku i know would never do such a terrible thing!
how could you and seimei have been the same person?
to imitate an old man, that is the art of sarugaku dance.
just like you.
raikou and hikaru...
those are your two faces, are they not?
i have two faces as well...
one yin, one yang.
as a sarugaku dancer, i am called upon to entertain the nobles and as an onmyoji, i use the information i've gathered to manipulate those same nobles!
it can't be true!
the mansairaku i know would never do such a cruel thing!
ripened fruit eventually falls off the tree.
rotten fruit cannot be allowed to cling, lest the trunk rot as well.
mansairaku, do you even realize what you're about to do?
there can be no creation without destruction.
a new vessel is necessary to receive the new world.
are you insane?
take another look with those eyes of yours, mansairaku!
the capital, and all its people are suffering now because of you!
it was you who taught me that the suffering must be saved!
that is why you and l shall save the capital together!
what?
i have long observed this with my own eyes.
no matter how many times a new emperor was crowned the corrupt politics of the court never changed.
the nobles, the onmyojis, and the warriors all live for their own glory!
even the commoners live a cutthroat existence.
that is the true face of this "capital of peace"...
all the more reason why l want to save the capital!
don't you understand that, mansairaku?
just as human life is finite, the lifespan of the capital, too, is finite.
the capital seems to have lived longer than it should have.
how can you be so arrogant?
at this very moment, the people of the capital are struggling to survive!
just listen to them, mansairaku!
please don't cause them any more suffering than you already have!
alas, you were too late, hikaru.
the capital has already passed through its yin phase and is now moving into its yang phase.
stop it right now!
there's nothing you can do at this point.
a barrier shall envelope us once i've intoned my curse.
this will lay the foundation for a great rebirth...
in other words, the demise of the capital.
it pleases me that we shall be together when that time comes, hikaru.
stop it!
please, you've got to stop, mansairaku!
mansairaku, if nothing will stop you from doing this, then...
then i will kill you!
that which is pure is of the heavens, that which is impure is of the earth.
yin and yang merge into that which we call the universe...
the pentacle chamber shall be placed on the lotus pedestal...
the 28 constellations form the three realms...
why?
water shall reverse itself and conquer fire and the end of all things shall be seen in the heavens.
mansairaku...
how i wish you'd only known me as hikaru!
mansairaku!
was that out of kindness?
the capital cannot be saved by mere kindness.
stop it, mansairaku...
stop it!
give it up, hikaru.
you've got to give it up!
there is nothing on earth you can do now!
once i've intoned the curse, all will end!
accept that, and wait here for that time to come!
in that case i'll stop you myself!
i pray to you, summon the true nature of suzaku.
stop it!
it's no use, hikaru.
it's not in you to kill me.
you've got to stop, mansairaku!
just do as i say and help lay the foundation for the new world, hikaru.
together, with me.
for the sake of my friends my brother and for the people of the capital...
mansairaku, i will kill you!
and i shall save the capital!
it's over!
mansairaku!
mansairaku, why?
you did it, hikaru.
but a weak thrust like that won't be enough to kill me.
just one more push.
you've got to push it in deeper, hikaru.
mansairaku...
why?
why are you making me do such a terrible thing?
why must i fight you, of all people?
i am only waging this battle for the sake of my friends, for the sake of my dead brother, for the sake of everyone!
and yet, why must i fight you?
why?
tell me why!
please tell me why, mansairaku!
why is it that you and i must be enemies in this battle?
destiny.
it is destiny.
it is your destiny, and mine.
destiny?
you and i were destined to meet, and to create the capital anew that is the fate that you and i share.
but, no...
my powers alone can accomplish nothing.
unless you and i join hands in this, there can be no rebirth for the capital.
then that means, l recovered the magatamas for...
now that you and i and all of the magatamas are here...
only now can creation begin anew.
if i hadn't recovered them...
then, if only i hadn't recovered the magatamas then none of this would have happened!
it can't be!
all those people who suffered and gave up their lives over the magatamas...
then all that i've done until now, what was it for?
tenchi nichigetsu sansei sonshin...
kyuusei sandal gyokujoshin....
kyuu kyuu nyo ritsuryou!
that's the 5th pillar of light!
taisho, so you didn't make it in time...
kintaro, i bet you're wishing you didn't stay with me here in the capital, huh?
hey, i had a lot of fun hanging with you, sadamitsu!
same here, kintaro!
i couldn't save it...
i couldn't save the capital after all...
tsuna, urabe, sadamitsu, kintaro, and my brother raikou...
please forgive me...
it's beyond my control now...
hikaru!
stop it!
hikaru!
hikaru...
mansairaku...
forgive me...
i think if i just leave everything the way it is...
i'll have nothing, nothing to lose at all.
now that you're not here with me under this sky...
why should i go on living?
tell me why...
the countless times you showed me kindness...
the unforgettable words you spoke to me...
here in my shattered dreams, i'm still trying to find them somehow.
we hurt each other, we loved each other and took from each other, you and i.
they had yet to see the light, those little wings of yours if only i could have somehow saved them.
those faraway memories i keep locked inside me...
those mistakes i made that i can never erase...
we were left with wounds that can never be healed, you and i.
just one word...that word i couldn 't say to you.
looks like it's over now...
hey, how about getting off me now, kintaro?
meanie!
well, i guess this isn't the hereafter.
this place got trashed!
tsuna...
taisho...
when we're all reincarnated, i hope you'll be our same old t aisho again...
lady minamoto no hikaru!
sadamitsu, where did the taisho and tsuna go?
they went off to this place full of flowers... someplace faraway.
i wanna go there, too!
no way, you and i belong in this dump of a capital!
okay...
then let's get something to eat now!
heian arc
heian arc the end
outside the window, the rain is falling, shutting us in.
if you feel bad about today, then come pick me up.
that's what i want to say, but i can 't...
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, one by one.
yet i just can 't seem to catch up with you.
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, so...
i want to get closer to you.
time goes on, the world has changed.
a new capital has been established far to the east of heian-kyo, in t okyo.
hikaru, tsuna, sadamitsu, urabe, and kintaro have encountered each other once again.
across the divide of 1,000 years the wheels of destiny have begun to turn.
otogi zoshi act fourteen, tokyo.
don't miss it!
__file_terminal__
otogi zoshi
traveler, you must not look back
wander on where the wind takes you
the steps you take will guide you on your way
journey on into the unknown
there's a voice you cannot forget
though it may bring you to tears
you must live with all your might
just think of your homeland
and all your grief will vanish
and all your grief will vanish throw old notions by the wayside
go, go, until you've slashed through the sunset
look up toward those distant memories
go, go, until you've smashed through the sunset
so you're here again?
i have made up my mind.
it is the heian period in japan.
in order to recover the final missing magatama, the magatama of fire hikaru and her companions are headed deep into chinzei territory where the kumaso clan led by shuten doji have their stronghold.
act eight red demon
you can tell we're in the south.
it's still somewhat humid, even this late in the day.
yes, it is.
are you all right?
yes.
hey, what are you doing?
there's something around here that smells amazing!
man, you thinking about food again?
it's that way!
hey, wait up!
my homeland...
sadamitsu!
i thought i smelled something delicious and i was right!
i picked a whole bunch of them, enough for you too!
all right, i'll have one later.
huh?
lady urabe.
do you know if there are any yellow- haired soldiers among the kumasos?
i've never heard of such a thing.
why do you ask?
uh, no special reason.
so is that it?
so that's the kumaso stronghold, huh?
let's get a closer look to make sure.
good idea.
all we can do now is try to find out as much as we can about this fortress.
yes, you're right.
i have never seen that kind of architecture before.
could such a diverse culture have taken hold in this part of the country?
look how big it is.
that means there must be a sizable force in there.
what are we gonna do?
what's this?
all this light and sound?
could it be a gunpowder shell?
what's that?
it's something that i once read about.
a ball of fire that explodes with a tremendous flash of light if thrown the gunpowder shell!
i knew that this technology was invented overseas, in china but i never dreamed that the kumasos had it as well!
this is no time to be blown away.
we're retreating!
here comes another one!
run!
heian-kyo onmyo-ryo
at this time of year, the crispness in the air following a rainfall is quite sublime.
indeed.
seimei, the minister of the right and i have taken the trouble of coming here to the onmyo-ryo for a reason.
we feel that it's time to decide on a date for the new emperor to ascend the throne.
indeed.
when would be a good day, seimei?
the next tsuchinoe day would be most opportune.
tsuchinoe?
the day that the previous emperor collapsed?
you would have his successor mark this joyous occasion on such an ill-fated day?
yang is produced in a yin environment, that is when yin and yang can achieve perfect harmony.
layering yin over yin would do little to enhance the quality of this balance.
is that so?
what do you think, minister of the right?
hmm, let me see...
such is the opinion of seimei.
i don't see that we have a choice.
i suppose you're right.
all right, then that's what we'll do.
with each change of the seasons, there should be one rare flower among all the temporary blooms.
how fragrant are the hydrangeas...
it is just as i once read in a document from china.
they are making these by mixing saltpeter, sulfur, and charcoal.
i might be able to come up with a similar device if i can get ahold of those materials.
really?
of course, i shall need some time, but yes.
in order to get into that fortress and take back the magatama it looks like we're going to have to throw them into a state of chaos.
if it's at all possible, l'd like you to try.
yes, my lord.
after all, this is the last magatama.
i do not wish to see the people in the capital suffering any more than you do.
boo!
hey, kintaro, you said you were born on ashigarayama mountain, right?
uh-huh.
so where's your mother?
mother?
i don't have one.
don't have one?
where were you born, sadamitsu?
i was born in the capital, but my father and mother are both dead.
is the capital a cool place?
that's right, you've never been there, huh?
so is the capital a cool place or not?
well, i guess you could say it's pretty cool.
the women are hot, and the sake's damn good.
this time of year, the hydrangeas should be in bloom too.
hydrangeas?
can you eat those?
flowers, they're flowers!
if push came to shove, i guess you could eat them, though.
that reminds me, when i was a kid i used to go over to suzaku-ln all the time to see the hydrangeas.
they'd be blooming all over the walls...
you never saw anything prettier.
but the priest there was scary.
if he caught you there, he'd whack you good.
hey, pay attention, you!
oh, hell...
still, i guess neither one of us has a place to go home to...
what's so great about having a place to go home to?
good question.
i guess i don't know the answer...
look, i've made one!
so this is a gunpowder shell!
i am astonished that you were actually able to make one.
it doesn't look like it'll taste any good.
it is not something to eat!
well, then, would you show us how powerful that shell is?
very well.
it will explode in a moment, so please take cover now.
so far we haven't heard a peep from that thing!
perhaps there's a flaw in the connection between the fuse and the saltpeter?
you mean it's no good?
then i'll go get it for you!
no, wait!
you'd better give it a few more minutes...
i just hope the kid's not planning to take a bite out of that thing!
surely not!
oh, no, just as i feared!
still, i was right!
that was the right design to use, wasn't it?
this is not the time to be overcome with joy!
hey, kintaro!
are you alive?
that tasted really bitter.
sadamitsu, i wouldn't try it if i were you!
the bastards from the capital will only come to destroy us if we stay here.
it all comes down to whoever strikes first!
hey, just think about it.
we've got a powerful ally.
it's the chance of a lifetime.
as long as he's on our side, we can't go wrong.
so come with me!
looks like you're still clinging to the memories of your past.
you told me that you were happy here.
but it's clear that at this point in time, your heart is somewhere else.
am i wrong?
i shall rule the entire world!
what do you think?
amazing!
well done, urabe!
that was prodigious.
thank you very much.
so this is the power of the gunpowder shell...
now, how can we use these gunpowder shells to our advantage?
our strategy will be to throw the fortress into a state of chaos.
these gunpowder shells are merely the supporting cast.
the most crucial role will be played by this!
and what is that?
this cylinder represents the core of our strategy.
to prevail when vastly outnumbered one must exceed the enemy's expectations.
are those things gonna work, though?
but of course.
my extensive testing will certainly bear this out.
our attack on the fortress shall be called "operation scarlet dust storm!
what's the matter?
it's nothing, man.
normally, it'd be impossible to capture that fortress with just the five of us.
however, if we manage to recover the last magatama, we will be able to save the lives of countless people now suffering in the capital.
we're going to split up into two groups.
tsuna and i will infiltrate the fortress.
i'm counting on the rest of you to divert the enemy's attention as best you can.
hold on a minute.
let me go with you this time.
but why?
because i'd like a turn at playing the hero for once!
here!
there's no stopping him.
i'll be off, then.
you three!
back me up, all right?
lord raikou!
lord tsuna!
you have your own job to do!
yes, that's right...
let us launch our attack!
operation scarlet dust storm, begin!
here they come...
but we shall give them measure for measure!
out of the way, sadamitsu!
no one's coming out to fight us.
what the hell's going on?
i have no idea.
it might be a trap.
let's not let our guard down!
unbelievable firepower!
how many troops do they have inside the fortress?
kintaro!
are you all right?
i'm fine!
come on, let's keep pounding them!
kintaro...
here comes another one!
the magatama!
my name's usui no sadamitsu.
are you shuten doji?
hey, hey, what the hell is that?
okay, so you're no gentleman!
they've stopped their attack.
what does this mean?
what could have happened?
lord raikou!
where can it be?
who are you?
can't you tell by looking at us?
we're the women of the fortress!
allow me to identify myself.
i am minamoto no raikou.
i am a warrior from the capital.
please, do not be frightened.
we have come here to recover the magatama of fire.
recover the magatama?
a likely story!
we know you're planning to kill us all and take over these lands!
no, you're wrong!
we came here for one reason, to take back the magatama and save the suffering people in the capital.
we have no intention of killing you, none whatsoever.
what do you know...
we heard that the warriors from the capital were barbarians but there are some like you, too...
please, i need you to tell me...
what kind of place is this?
is this not the kumaso stronghold?
yes, this is the kumaso stronghold.
but we are not members of the kumaso clan.
even so, the kumasos have treated outsiders like us with kindness.
it was here that i met my husband, and was blessed with my child.
as a woman, i could not be happier living here.
hey, pretty good.
not many people could hold their own against me, even in the capital!
what, you're waiting for me?
all right, let's do it!
so there are no kumaso soldiers here?
the only soldier here is this girl's husband, ivan.
ivan?
go on, explain it to him.
ivan is a soldier who came here from another land.
another land?
then that's where you got your gunpowder technology...
that's right.
that is something ivan taught us.
but my husband is a modest, kind-hearted man.
lord shuten favored him not just for his knowledge but for his personality as well.
i do believe that my husband is happy here.
but ivan is always looking towards the sea.
i suppose he wants to return to his homeland.
not exactly pretty, the way you fight!
i see.
and where is lord shuten doji now?
that's the thing, he's gotten all crazy in the head, our lord shuten.
we can't wait for him to go back to being his old self.
we feel so bad for ivan, having to protect the fortress alone...
alone, you say?
take that!
ivan!
you're not hurt, are you?
you're safe, aren't you?
sadamitsu!
taisho!
what's going on here?
this man's name is ivan.
i was told he came here from another land.
you mean, you're married to this guy?
yes.
ivan only wanted to protect the place everyone will be coming home to.
everyone?
shuten doji is on his way to the capital.
he has gone to burn heian-kyo to the ground.
is that true?
and what about the magatama?
shuten doji has taken it with him.
let's leave this place together.
i know lord shuten will forgive us.
i will follow you wherever you go.
even if it's beyond the sea...
no, you're wrong there.
your husband's homeland is here now.
it's chinzei, because you and the baby are here.
my homeland!
i sure wish i could be in your shoes!
having a woman who loves you so much...
i mean, i hardly ever think about my homeland but i guess i'm starting to appreciate having one now.
i feel like going back to suzaku-ln to see the hydrangeas like i used to!
taisho!
no time to be bummed right now.
let's hurry back to the capital.
to our own homeland!
right.
damn that shuten!
how dare he attack the capital!
no time to lose!
we're going back to the capital!
the capital is in peril.
shuten doji and his troops are now within striking distance of heian-kyo.
hikaru and her companions race desperately back to the capital now on the brink of destruction.
...now on the brink of destruction.
to be continued...
outside the window, the rain is falling, shutting us in.
if you feel bad about today, then come pick me up.
that's what i want to say, but i can 't...
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, one by one.
yet i just can 't seem to catch up with you.
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, so...
i want to get closer to you.
a young warrior, minamoto no raikou, returns to the capital with a magatama.
perhaps the suffering of the people of heian-kyo will be over soon.
that mournful and elegant melody coming from her flute...
could it be that she's calling to me?
as soon as this battle is over for good, then i shall...
act nine, darkness.
don't miss it!
__file_terminal__
otogi zoshi
traveler, you must not look back
wander on where the wind takes you
the steps you take will guide you on your way
journey on into the unknown
there's a voice you cannot forget
though it may bring you to tears
you must live with all your might
just think of your homeland
and all your grief will vanish
and all your grief will vanish throw old notions by the wayside
go, go, until you've slashed through the sunset
look up toward those distant memories
go, go, until you've smashed through the sunset
june 972
we must hurry or shuten doji will destroy the capital!
it is the heian period in japan.
learning that the kumaso troops led by shuten doji are on their way to destroy the capital...
hikaru and her companions have returned in haste to heian-kyo bearing the magatama of water.
act nine darkness
so far we haven't seen hide nor hair of shuten doji...
are you lord minamoto no raikou?
what?
is that lord raikou?
has he returned with the magatama?
we beg of you, lord raikou, please save us!
lord raikou!
all right, all right!
let us get by, will you?
everyone looks so hungry...
the capital looks even more ravaged than before we left.
we must find the last remaining magatama of fire as soon as possible...
but where is shuten doji, who took the magatama with him?
he's around here.
i know he's just biding his time, waiting for the right moment to attack!
you only brought one?
what about the magatama of fire?
we traveled to the kumaso stronghold in chinzei but shuten doji had already left for the capital with his troops.
the stronghold was completely empty.
the magatama of fire is still in his possession.
he's advancing on the capital?
you speak nonsense to cover up your failure to bring back the magatama!
no, i speak the truth!
shuten doji's army of 1,000 men is waiting for a chance to pounce on the capital.
i implore you not to delay in bolstering the capital's defenses!
do you really believe it's possible to bring down the capital with a mere 1,000 men?
we have a force of 20,000 here!
yes, but shuten will be using a strange new technology called gunpowder from china!
seimei, what do you think?
to be able to claim victory when the enemy is caught unaware is that not using a rare and unusual truth to its greatest effect?
if lord raikou insists his story to be true, then i believe it would be wise to post 5,000 kebiishi at all of the capital gates.
moreover, as lord raikou appears to be weary from his hasty return from chinzei, l believe some rest will do him good.
well!
what a fine idea.
a coward such as raikou should just skulk in the back of his house!
raikou, you are dismissed!
consider yourself under house arrest until this matter is resolved!
that's right, you are hereby confined!
now, as for the festival for the return of all five magatamas, what do say shall we have a dashi drawn through the streets?
now that is a splendid idea indeed!
what?
confined?
is that what the minister of the left decreed?
yes, on the advice of abe no seimei...
that damned white fox!
lord seimei is an onmyoji of the highest virtue.
i am sure he only spoke out of concern for lord raikou's health...
the only explanation i can think of is that he's planning to take credit himself for the last magatama!
he has the implicit trust of the emperor, and he is the head of the onmyo-ryo.
what could he possibly want?
all i know is that one cannot trust the onmyojis!
okay, kids, that's enough!
it's depressing enough around here.
let's not have any infighting here.
right, taisho?
we must try to figure out what we can do now to save the capital.
maybe we should just storm shuten doji's base camp!
but we don't even know where shuten is!
ever since we returned to the capital, we haven't seen any sign of his troops.
all we've seen around here are the traveling performers who've come for the emperor's ascension ceremony and those mountain priests who burn the goma for incantations...
goma?
you mean we get to eat sesame dumplings?
not that kind of goma!
oh, it's not?
man!
you mean the prayer for the next emperor's long and peaceful reign?
where are they doing it?
from what i've heard in the capital, it's gonna be at ooeyama.
ooeyama?
but the main temple in this area is kinpusen in yoshino.
the capital lies to the southwest of ooeyama, in other words it's the demon's back gate.
why would they choose to perform the rite from a direction normally shunned?
sounds fishy to me...
now that i think of it, the women being sent to shuten weren't just from hitachi.
i'll bet the kumasos weren't the only ones in league with him!
the magatamas were in the possession of five different tribes in each region.
in each case, there was one person controlling that region.
it wouldn't be farfetched to assume that the rest of them had ties to shuten doji.
the kumaso troops number 1,000.
add that to the regional tribes.
there's no telling how many we'll be up against.
even with 5,000 soldiers protecting the capital gates...
this is really bad news!
lord raikou!
i'm going to ooeyama!
hey, hold on!
i'm going to ooeyama to find out if shuten is there.
if i can provide him with proof, i'm sure the emperor will take action!
but wait!
lord raikou, remember that you are under confinement!
in that case, i shall return to the onmyo-ryo and ask lord seimei to lift the sentence of confinement.
but you can't go there!
no need for concern.
i am certain that lord seimei will understand.
still, if shuten doji has his base camp on ooeyama mountain we won't be able to just bust in there without a strategy.
i have a plan that should work...
if you wish to hide in a forest, be a tree, to hide in the mountains, be a rock.
lord raikou, l, tsuna, have a favor to ask of you.
lord raikou, i am asking you to consider staying behind here!
what?
it is our job as your retainers to investigate ooeyama.
there is no reason for you to violate your sentence of confinement!
tsuna!
how can l, minamoto no raikou, send only my retainers to enemy territory while i cower in the safety of my home?
lord raikou no, i mean lady hikaru!
you are first and foremost lady hikaru, not lord raikou!
do not throw away your chance for happiness as a woman...
tsuna!
i implore you...
don't say another word!
my resolve will crumble!
please, leave me alone now.
am i not capable of saving the capital?
my brother...
i am so...
wait.
are you going to the onmyo-ryo?
yes.
in that case, i shall escort you.
i must get onikirimaru honed immediately and since the onmyo-ryo is on my way...
you have always been a great help to me...
at first, i thought you were a court spy sent to watch over our actions during our journey...
but apparently those were just groundless fears.
i do not blame you for seeing me in that light...
at the time, all i could think of was taking the magatamas by any means.
but i have come to think only of how i can keep you all safe.
that is the only thing on my mind now.
both you and lord raikou are very dear to my heart!
i...
i, too?
yes, you and lord sadamitsu and kintaro, i value you all as my friends.
yes, i see.
lord tsuna, you can't be...
don't say anything!
it happens from time to time, that's all.
lord tsuna!
just don't say anything to lord raikou.
please.
beautiful clouds spread long and thick...
and an occasional sunbeam can be seen...
through the bamboo blinds i see the red plums blooming everywhere.
next year, when these flowers bloom again, who will be here to see them?
my elderly father's garden shall be ravaged by the wind and the rain.
my brother, please tell me...
is what you describe in this poem truly going to come to pass?
ah, there you are!
father!
raikou...
no, i mean hikaru...
it was i who sent you on these journeys in your brother's place.
but losing you would be far more terrible than tarnishing our family name.
no more journeys, l want you to stay here.
but there's only one more left to go, the magatama of fire!
all i wish for is to see you happily married, no more.
actually, i've summoned a woman to help you with bridal preparations.
i'll bring her here right away.
father, i do not...
listen, hikaru...
i do not want to lose anyone, ever again.
your brother raikou deserves to be properly buried.
now then, hikaru, come with me.
hikaru!
lord seimei, may i ask you to intervene on lord minamoto no raikou's behalf to have his confinement lifted?
the kumaso clan led by shuten doji has taken up a position they will lay siege until the capital falls!
urabe, how would you read this?
do you mean the magatamas?
the principles of onmyo gogyo...
wood begets fire, fire begets earth, earth begets metal metal begets water, water begets wood in other words, the five elements in balance.
to save the capital, there remains only one, the magatama of fire...
where do you draw the line between good and evil?
above all, your true intentions must be strong and fearsome...
mansairaku...
the melody from your flute was like a sorrowful voice, longing to see me.
mansairaku, l...
why you are grieving, i do not know but if my dancing will help to lift your spirits then let me send a beacon of light into your heart!
if only this moment would last forever...
if only someday i could dance just for you...
mansairaku, i'm so glad i met you.
and i you.
your flute eased the pain in my heart.
you dance the grief of the people, you dance to venerate the dead.
people have fought and destroyed themselves over a single magatama.
i no longer understand the purpose of my journey.
but once i get this journey behind me, then i know that i will find the answer and then, i want to...
i, too, want to be with you...
but we can't now...
until we meet again...
tsuna!
have you been standing there all along?
lady hikaru, what is this?
it's the poem my brother left for me.
but look at this!
to hide in a forest, become a tree," huh?
what a great idea!
urabe's a real genius, isn't she?
yeah, it would be a good thing if you tried to be more like her!
it's that woman!
over there!
ooeyama...
sorry to keep you waiting.
the kid wouldn't leave until l made him some lunch to take along.
rice balls, rice balls!
sadamitsu...
that is a poem left to lord raikou by someone he trusted implicitly...
it was written on his deathbed.
it's hard to make out since the words are all smudged.
can you read them now?
seimei has a hidden agenda!
do you think he's in league with the kumasos?
the kumaso troops advanced, and positioned themselves on ooeyama to attack on the day of the new emperor's ascension...
it's much too well-organized!
but if he has an informer within the capital, then it all makes sense.
abe no seimei is pulling the strings...
huh?
lady urabe hasn't shown up yet...
she can't be...
urabe will come!
she values us all as her friends...
that's what she told me.
ibaraki...
lord shuten, it is not yet the appointed time.
do it!
burn the damned capital to the ground!
what's going on?
what in the world is happening?
so the demon could not wait, eh?
we are going to ooeyama!
it is a desperate life-or-death struggle with shuten doji that awaits hikaru and her companions as they head for ooeyama.
to be continued...
outside the window, the rain is falling, shutting us in.
if you feel bad about today, then come pick me up.
that's what i want to say, but i can 't...
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, one by one.
yet i just can 't seem to catch up with you.
the dreams that i wished upon a star are all coming true, so...
i want to get closer to you.
so i guess we're headed for a showdown with that shuten doji, huh?
can't wait to put my sword to the test!
i mean, it's up to us to protect heian-kyo.
you're acting kind of strange, t aisho.
i'll bet that shuten doji has something up his sleeve.
and it's really bugging me that lady urabe hasn't come back yet...
maybe something's happened to her?
act 1 0:
shuten
don't miss it!
__file_terminal__
gee, brain,
what do you want to do tonight?
the same thing we do every night, pinky
try to take over the world.
♪ they're pinky and the brain ♪
♪ yes, pinky and the brain ♪
♪ one is a genius ♪
♪ the other's insane ♪
♪ they're laboratory mice ♪
♪ their genes have been spliced ♪
♪ they're dinky ♪
♪ they're pinky and the brain ♪
♪ brain, brain, brain ♪
♪ brain, brain, brain, brain, brain ♪
♪ before each night is done ♪
♪ their plan will be unfurled ♪
♪ by the dawning of the sun ♪
♪ they'll take over the world ♪
♪ they're pinky and the brain ♪
♪ yes, pinky and the brain ♪
♪ their twilight campaign ♪
♪ is easy to explain ♪
♪ to prove their mousey worth ♪
♪ they'll overthrow the earth ♪
♪ they're dinky ♪
♪ they're pinky and the brain ♪
♪ brain, brain, brain ♪
♪ brain, brain, brain, brain ♪
narf!
captioning made possible by warner bros.
woman: oh, thank you.
thank you for curing me, dr. freud.
thanks to your miracle technique,
i am no longer delusional.
it's called hypnosis, fraulein.
i took you back to re-experience your childhood.
whatever you did, it worked.
i used to think that little men were following me around,
but now i know that little men
were just in meine imagination.
[doorbell rings]
ach.
excuse me, fraulein.
you stand lookout while i write my name
in dr. freud's appointment book.
right, brain.
hello.
lovely day, isn't it?
narf!
uh, doctor... hurry, pinky.
let's go.
ta-ta.
nice chatting with you.
funny.
there was nobody there.
now, fraulein, where were we?
aaah!
the little men!
they're back!
bl-bl-bl-bl-bl-bl... aaah!
hmm.
you know, you might want to think about another appointment.
aah!
what are we going to do now, brain?
ring some more doorbells and run away?
no, pinky.
ohh!
we've come to vienna
to see the great hypnotizing psychiatrist
dr. sigmund freud.
oh, bravo, brain.
you're finally getting some help
for that problem of yours
you know, the one where you ring people's doorbells
and then run away.
troz!
look, pinky, i'll explain this one more time.
my appointment with dr. freud is only a ruse.
when he tries to hypnotize me,
i will use a pair of mirrored glasses to reverse the process,
thereby hypnotizing freud himself.
egad!
brilliant, brain!
then you can make him wear a lovely dress and act like a monkey.
pinky, how would that possibly help us
to take over the world?
well, actually, i was thinking of it
more as entertainment.
poit.
all vienna knows that the emperor franz josef
is being treated by freud for depression.
when freud is under my spell... unh!
i will order him to hypnotize the emperor
into giving me, the brain,
his right to the imperial throne,
allowing me to take over the world!
[squeak] [plop]
uhh!
ooh!
did you bring my mirrored glasses, pinky?
yes, i did, brain.
they're right in here with all the fun, fun games
i brought to play with in the waiting room.
zort!
[gasps]
oh, look.
i've got jacks and wind-up toys
and a mahjong tile
and a bottle cap-- ooh!
and yarn.
freud: herr brain, you're next.
no!
don't leave me!
i'll be so bored!
what shall i do?
well, what about all this stuff?
boring.
been there, done that.
well, make small talk with that man over there
and give me my mirrored glasses.
um...hi.
let's see.
um... do you know anything about lilliputians?
excuse me?
i'm sorry.
i'm just trying to make small talk.
ach, don't trouble yourself.
i'm just a sad little sad man.
life brings me nothing but dreary sadness.
i'm sad all the time.
boy, am i sad.
well, i brought a pair of googly-eye glasses.
they'll cheer you up.
oogedy-boogedy!
ha ha ha ha ha!
narf!
but all i see is my own dreary, sad little sad face.
poit.
these aren't my googly-eye glasses.
these are mirrored gla-- [gasps]
uh-oh.
you are getting sleepy... very sleepy.
no, no.
you are getting sleepy.
[boing]
hey, take off those ridiculous glasses.
huh?
now, where were we?
ah, yes.
you are getting sleepy.
wait.
pinky has my other glasses.
i--i need them.
i'll just
no, silly-billy.
you don't need glasses to be hypnotized.
oh, yes.
really, i...
have...to...get...
them.
i...
yes.
let yourself go.
must remember to... hurt pinky at first opportunity.
no.
you don't want to hurt anybody.
we are going to discover who hurt you.
we are going back to your childhood.
yes.
going back... back.
you are in a deep sleep, ja?
ja.
i mean... yes.
i want you to think about a time
when you were very young.
freud:
where you are, brain?
brain:
in a field, playing.
how old are you?
just a child,
not a care in the world.
[grunts]
[snap]
[clatter]
[grunts]
suddenly i'm being chased,
hunted down like some sort of rabid dog.
terrified, i run home to my parents.
they rush to my aid,
but my assailant is overpowering.
i was taken from my home
and sent to a research facility.
as i entered those doors,
the carefree innocence of my youth
was snuffed out like a candle,
replaced with unremitting darkness.
lab-coated goons tried to break our spirits
and brainwash us into submission.
others emerged from the experience... not quite all there.
narf!
zort!
hee hee hee hee!
the slightest insolence resulted in punishment
both swift and brutal.
please, sir, i'd like some more.
[mice gasp]
more?
you want more?
aah.
aah!
i never met a man i didn't meet.
aah!
the problem with congress is... they're all liars.
aah!
make it stop!
and how did that make you feel?
angry... like i wanted to... to take over the world.
hmm.
emotional displacement.
obviously, you were missing the comfort of your home.
describe the scene when you were taken away.
describe your home.
brain: it's warm.
it's inviting.
it's... a tin can.
there's something on the side of it, a... a picture.
freud:
a picture of what?
no.
i--i mean, i--i can't tell.
yes.
you must.
it's a picture of... of... the world!
and then they dragged me away.
and you want your world back.
it's simple.
yes.
[snap] what?
where am i?
your problem is simple, herr brain.
you just want to go home.
i do?
ja.
you don't want to take over the world.
i don't?
[click] ok, time's up.
wait.
my plan.
i--i need more time.
ja.
we set up another appointment.
no, i-i've got to...
how to hypnotize anyone.
create a relaxing atmosphere.
okey-dokey, you sick little puppy.
move it.
i got another client.
oh, there's not enough time for this.
[smack] oh!
[gasps]
oh, no.
what have i done?
oh, no.
what have i done?
yes!
you'll obey my every command.
i will obey.
but wait.
maybe freud is right.
maybe this obsession of mine
is nothing but cheap nostalgia.
maybe all i'm really longing for is... is... a rusty tin can.
what a quack.
ha ha ha ha ha!
narf!
oh, very good, mr. elephant.
zort!
[trumpets] ha ha ha ha ha!
ach, herr pinky, i'm having the most exciting fun
for the first time in my dreary, sad life.
ha ha ha ha!
narf!
ha ha ha ha!
i will hypnotize the emperor franz josef
and order him to make brain his successor.
perfect.
when i snap my fingers, you will awaken.
[snap]
ach!
herr brain, it's late.
you made good progress today.
more than you know, doctor.
oh, come over any time, herr pinky.
here is meine card.
auf wiedersehen.
gesundheit!
who's your new friend, pinky?
his most imperial emperor franz josef"?
pinky, that's the man i wanted freud to hypnotize.
oh, he doesn't want to be hypnotized now, brain.
since i taught him all my favorite games,
he says he'll never need therapy again.
i believe i need therapy, pinky,
to find out why i hang around with a nut like you.
come.
we must go back to the lab
and prepare for tomorrow night.
why, brain?
what are we going to do tomorrow night?
try to shrink your head?
no, pinky,
the same thing we do every night,
no matter how forcefully the purveyors of psychobabble
attempt to dissuade us
try to take over the world!
♪ they're dinky ♪
♪ they're pinky and the brain ♪
♪ brain, brain, brain, brain ♪
assuming a standard height-to-weight ratio
and a 3-point margin of error... pinky: ha ha ha ha!
[synthetic laughter]
factor in g-force and wind shear
of each downward thrust... ha ha ha ha!
[synthetic laughter]
that does it!
pinky, what are you doing?
ha ha ha!
oh, poit!
i'm playing
with my new "tickle me herbert" doll, brain.
you just tickle him here,
and he laughs and laughs.
kootchie kootchie kootchie!
[synthetic laughter]
well, put it away.
i can hardly hear myself think.
maybe you're just not thinking loud enough, brain.
pinky, may i see that for a moment?
sure--uhh!
[synthetic laughter]
[laughter fades]
oh, brain, i think he likes you.
zort!
now maybe i'll have the quiet i need
to finish perfecting my latest plan.
you might say we're going fishing.
fishing?
troz!
oh, what fun, brain!
i'll bring my beekeeper's bonnet
and all the stuff you need for keeping bees.
oh, no, no, wait.
that's not fishing.
ha!
oh, that's skiing.
try to focus, pinky.
this is the finnious japonicus,
commonly known in japan as mugu.
one bite of its tail renders anyone who eats it
unable to move for 24 hours.
i had a linoleum sandwich last week
that made me feel the same way,
but shiny.
pinky, if you have anything to say,
please raise your hand.
right, brain.
and place it over your mouth.
[muffled] ok.
my plan is simply this
i will capture a pair of mugu, breed them,
and market the tails throughout the world
as cappy brain's frozen fish sticks.
while the populace is immobilized,
i shall implement my plan of world domination.
there's only one catch.
oh?
well, that won't be enough
to feed the whole world, then, will it?
[muffled] sorry.
the japonicus is so rare
that the only known specimens
are those bred in captivity
for the dining pleasure of japan's most elite sumo wrestlers.
[muffled question]
take your hand off your mouth
if you're going to speak, pinky.
oh.
[muffled question]
i have anticipated your query, pinky.
i plan to become
one of japan's most elite sumo wrestlers.
observe.
narf!
[gasps]
the "tickle me dom deluise"?
oh, why, that's the most expensive one.
look closer, pinky.
i have modified my suit
to fit the precise specifications
of a champion sumo wrestler.
with the adjustments i've made,
i'll be able to flip a 600-pound man.
won't you need an awfully large spatula for that?
don't forget to pack your doll
when we go to japan, pinky.
i might feel the need
for some intelligent conversation.
and sumo!
noogie.
give him the noogie.
noogie, noogie, noogie.
unh!
good work, tomu-san.
tomorrow we work on the wedgie.
now go.
brain: master hama?
yes?
allow me to introduce myself.
i am the brain.
i have come many miles with my small valet pinky
to study sumo at the camp of master hama.
your head is as small as a lychee nut,
but your physique is excellent for sumo.
i would be honored to teach you.
actually, i am but an insignificant lab mouse
attempting to take over the world.
the honor is all mine.
[clank]
whaa!
whoa!
[crash]
there is no need for false humility
and groveling.
come.
we begin immediately.
let us begin our first lesson.
excellent.
who do i flip first?
patience, brain-san.
there will be time for flipping
when you are more advanced.
today, we consider the pebble.
consider the pebble?
zen exercise to increase concentration.
observe the pebble's simplicity.
listen to its silence.
become the pebble.
you want me to stare at a rock all day?
[chuckles] oh, no, no.
just until lunchtime.
see you in 4 hours.
hama thinks i'm a beginner, pinky.
until he lets me compete
and prove that i belong in the camp
with advanced wrestlers,
i'll never get access to the mugu.
pinky?
what?
oh, sorry, brain.
i was becoming one with the pebble.
were you?
yes.
and it's really easy.
all you have to do is make your mind a complete blank.
too bad drawing a blank isn't an olympic event, pinky.
we could retire on the gold medals you'd win.
eat well, brain-san.
we have much training left to do.
aren't you hungry, master hama?
no.
i eat big lunch with my star wrestlers
in other dining hall
fried mugu, cajun mugu, mugu chowder, mojo mugu.
someday, brain-san,
perhaps you will be allowed to eat mugu, too, eh?
sooner than you think, my pan-pacific friend.
the sumo men must eat a lot to get so fat.
wrestlers not fat, pinky-san.
it is muscle tissue
resulting from years of strenuous yoga exercises.
[door opens]
who wants pie?
[wrestlers all talk at once]
well, even the best athletes like a good meringue.
pinky, a day has passed,
and we have nothing to show for it.
oh, i don't know, brain.
i've developed a lovely relationship
with our new friend the pebble.
pinky, have you ever contemplated the sound of one hand bopping?
one hand, um... don't think so.
aah!
[crowd chattering in distance]
what is it?
what's going on?
it is matsuhisa, the best wrestler in camp.
he has had too much pie
and is taking on all challengers.
grrr!
pinky: egad, brain.
you'd have to be quite a wrestler
to beat that matsu hoozy fellow.
pinky, are you pondering what i'm pondering?
i think so, brain,
but who wants to see
snow white and the seven samurai?
no, pinky.
i will defeat the great matsuhisa,
thereby proving
that i am a great sumo wrestler.
then you can eat pie till you pop.
narf!
[smack] aah!
matsuhisa, i will accept your challenge.
what's going on here?
brain-san has gone completely insane.
hmm, oh, that would explain
why he won't talk to my new friend the pebble.
[grunting]
whoa!
oof!
quit now, brain-san.
better to be live coward than dead idiot.
don't worry, hama.
it's a matter of scientific fact
that i can flip any man up to 600 pounds.
matsuhisa weighs 601 pounds.
arrr!
rats.
noogie, noogie, noogie.
ow!
stop hurting brain, you, you pie wrecker!
[grunts] whoa!
[crash]
[boing]
whaa!
[grunts]
kootchie kootchie.
[laughing]
kootchie kootchie kootchie.
poit.
kootchie kootchie koo.
zort!
kootchie koo.
kootchie poit!
[crowd gasps]
whaa ha!
whaa ha ha ha!
whoa ho ho ho!
whoa!
oof!
[cheering]
the winner!
narf!
bring on the pie!
[chattering]
pinky: ooh, now we can get into the fancy restaurant, brain.
yes, pinky,
and we'll get ahold of the fancy fish.
this way, pinky.
this is it, pinky.
the world's only specimens of finnious japonicus
are in this tank.
soon, kitchen freezers throughout the world
will be stocked with cappy brain's delicious mugu tails,
bursting with paralytic goodness.
you put the yum in yum-yum-yummy, cappy brain.
zort!
[both grunt]
tell me if you see any movement, pinky.
pinky: um, think i saw some movement just then, brain.
perhaps i should have researched the size of the mugu
a bit more thoroughly.
what do we do now, cappy brain?
hope the chef pushes the mugu, pinky,
and plan for tomorrow night.
why?
what are we going to do tomorrow night, brain?
same thing we do every night, pinky
dry off, and then
try to take over the world.
[bubbly voices] * they're dinky *
♪ they're pinky and the brain ♪
♪ brain, brain, brain, brain ♪
captioning made possible by warner bros.
__file_terminal__
jeez, brain,
what do you want to do tonight?
the same thing we do every night, pinky
try to take over the world.
* they're pinky and the brain *
* yes, pinky and the brain
* one is a genius *
* the other's insane *
* they're laboratory mice *
* their genes have been spliced *
* they're dinky *
* they're pinky and the brain *
* brain, brain, brain
* brain, brain, brain, brain
* brain
* before each night is done
* their plan will be unfurled
* by the dawning of the sun
* they'll take over the world *
* they're pinky and the brain *
* yes, pinky and the brain
* their twilight campaign
* is easy to explain
* to prove their mousey worth
* they'll overthrow the earth *
* they're dinky *
* they're pinky and the brain *
* brain, brain, brain
* brain, brain
* brain, brain **
narf!
captioning made possible by warner bros.
at last, professor mifune,
you have perfected the process
of shrinking electronic devices.
so we can sell them to americans
for lots of money.
yes, shimura.
now i say to you,
miniaturization will be very big!
ha ha!
ha!
ha ha ha!
ha ha ha ha!
flash!
rumored sightings
of legendary prehistoric monster gollyzilla
cause thousands to flee for their lives in northern japan.
[telephone rings]
yes?
yes.
very well.
that was the emperor.
he wants your scientific opinion on gollyzilla.
gollyzilla!
come.
there is no time to lose!
narf!
brain, let us go and see gollyzilla.
we can watch excitedly as he crushes buildings,
and then flee in terror.
snap out of it, pinky.
oh!
thanks, brain.
this scientific equipment will be invaluable
for my plan to take over the world.
you mean, you're going to shrink electronics
so only mice will be able to operate them?
don't be absurd, pinky.
there's no future in miniaturization.
it's big things that strike fear
into the hearts of humans,
like that ridiculous legend
of gollyzilla
mythical folly
that directionless humans hang on.
are you pondering what i'm pondering?
i think so, brain.
but i don't think kaye ballard's in the union.
[brain] i will alter this equipment,
and enlarge myself to become a 400-foot-tall mouse,
who'll save the world from gollyzilla.
butyou just said there was no such thing
as gollyzilla, brain.
there is now, pinky
or should i say pinkzilla?
yes, i see.
there!
i've reversed
the specifications of the ray.
are you ready, pinky?
ta-da!
quick!
what do you think, brain?
pretty scary, eh?
yes, pinky.
terrifying.
stand by.
aaahh!
[ptooey]
narf!
where are you, brain?
i can't see you.
i'm down
oh--oh, wait a sec, brain.
i've got some gum on my shoe.
apparently your i.q. didn't grow
along with your shoe size, pinky.
now, go on your rampage, pinkzilla,
and show no mercy!
[thud]
narf!
poit!
i am pinkzilla,
king of the monsters!
raargh!
in 10 minutes, i will arrive on the scene
and save tokyo from the terror of...
pinkzilla!
raargh!
yes, i see.
i love you, fumiko.
and i love you, herschel.
[thud]
aaahh!
gollyzilla!
hello!
i'm on a rampage!
narf!
scamper away in terror now.
go on!
boo!
ha ha ha!
aaahh!
aah!
gollyzilla!
we must run for our lives.
[people screaming]
poit!
oh, i can't see through this thing.
oh!
oh, no!
the giant monster is molting!
huh!
aah!
egad!
i'm all a-tangle.
narf!
whoa!
yes, i see.
now to make myself the largest mouse on earth
and hero of the planet.
call me brainodo!
[loud footsteps]
people of tokyo, do not fear.
i, brainodo, have come to save you.
aah!
it is another giant monster,
even more ugly than gollyzilla!
actually, i am an artificially enlarged lab mouse
here to save you.
you may thank me later by making me your leader.
[gasps]
unless that doesn't fit into your plans.
where is pinky?
how can i save the city from gollyzilla
with no gollyzilla?
aah!
rarrr!
[snorts]
rarrr!
[snorts]
rarrr!
pinky!
[muffled growls]
where have you been?
never mind.
i can't understand you in that stupid costume.
make this battle look realistic, pinky.
everything depends on it.
takethat, hideous beast!
[cough cough]
ooh!
ahh.
ooh.
ahh.
eee!
ahh.
now you've gotten me mad, pinky.
um, excuse me, brain.
go away now, pinky.
can't you see i'm fighting with pinky?
narf!
right.
oh, no.
wait.
how can you be fighting with me over there
if i'm standing over here?
it's a very simple principle, pinky.
it's because...
grr!
that is the real gollyzilla.
rarrr!
aah!
rarrr!
aah!
yes, i
aah!
grr!
rarrr!
grr!
the fat guy in the suit is surprisingly agile.
uhh!
aah!
[pinky] too bad we're not giant anymore, brain.
we are still giant, pinky.
unfortunately, so is everything else.
our relative smallness remains,
but on this we should not dwell.
for we must plan for tomorrow night.
what are the three of us going to do tomorrow night, brain?
three of us?
hmm.
still the same thing we do every night, pinky
try to take over the world!
yes.
yes, i see.
* they're dinky *
* they're pinky and the brain *
* brain, brain, brain, brain *
[muttering]
core, mathematical essence.
o.k., where is that thing?
hmm.
and entering in...
factoring in...
hmm.
[muttering]
numerical equivalent...
the problem there...
ahh!
pinky.
pinky!
whoa!
narf!
what were you doing up there, pinky?
oh, i was having a devil of a time cleaning the chimney, brain.
we don't have a chimney.
oh, well, there you are, then.
no, pinky.
there you are.
i am absolutely nowhere near that vicinity.
have you ever thought, pinky, why it is
that we haven't yet succeeded in taking over the world?
oh, i know why, brain-- gremlins.
little sprinkly sprites
that confuse us and mix us up,
always twiddling their little fingers
in our ears.
grrrr!
an interesting theory,
but i've reviewed our past efforts, pinky,
turning the situations into numbers
in an effort to locate the exact problem.
oh.
well, that sounds very, um...
narf!
yes, i'm sure it does.
i've plotted the numbers
and the result is quite interesting.
egad, brain!
that looks like me, but flat!
it is you, pinky.
my calculations show
that you are the problem.
pinky?
yes.
pinky.
scientifically speaking,
it's because you are a spazzy beetle-headed dufus
with the intellect of a mule hoof
that i have yet to conquer the world!
oh, you're not going to get rid of me, are you, brain?
i mean, you, working as a single?
look what happened to jerry lewis
after he split with dean.
all that stuff in your hair.
point taken.
but fear not, i have another plan.
pinky, i am going to make you smart.
i...
i don't understand, brain.
exactly.
but you will, my friend...
you will.
egad, brain!
why doesn't anybody
just make themselves really smart?
i mean, this all seems so simple.
like all great things, pinky,
the idea is simple, but the execution
oh, there lies the difficulty.
there lies the genius.
taking a little nap, is he?
pinky, operating this machine
requires calculations on the fly,
split-second decisions, huge amounts of data,
incredible mental abilities,
and precise timing.
in other words
i couldn't do it.
no.
whaa!
ha ha ha!
hee hee ha ha!
ha ha ha!
ha ha!
hmm...47 aught 6.
19 kelvin, fibonacci "n" minus one...
coming, coming...
now!
pinky?
ha ha!
ha ha ha!
whoo!
that was fun, brain.
ha ha ha!
narf!
ooh, i'm all tingly.
fun, perhaps, but obviously not successful.
no, no, no.
i think it was.
at first it seemed like the folded dipole wasn't working
as your center-fed horizontally mounted conductor,
but frequencies below 30 megahertz
loud and clear!
and i must say, brain, the peak value wave shape
of the impulse voltage?
glorious!
narf!
i mean, hitting that maximum value
without appreciable superimposed oscillations
egad, brain!
brilliant!
ha ha ha!
yes!
here is tonight's plan
for world domination, pinky.
i'm curious as to your opinion.
right-o, brain.
narf!
i will pose as jimmy hoffa, back from vacation.
labor leaders will bow before me
and help me utilize the giant industrial complex
to build this-- the forced verto-convector.
it will create millions of steaming, tiny geysers
that will actually lift people
several inches off the ground, immobilizing them.
egad, brain!
it's like giant air hockey.
brilliant!
oh, wait.
no, no, no.
yes, pinky?
well, the coefficient values of your fouriers
i mean, this should be sine, not cosine.
poit.
kind of flips the whole thing around.
won't work.
pinky...
that's right.
are you pondering what i'm pondering?
yes, i am.
this is fantastic.
do you see?
you've saved us an entire evening.
tremendous!
forget that plan.
look at this one...
colleague.
oh, brain!
ha ha!
poit!
we will program a computer to generate
a fantastically popular romance novel.
oh, lovely!
it will contain a hypno-phonetic sentence
so long and so confusing,
the reader will be forced to reread it endlessly out loud.
and the frequencies of those sounds
will hypnotize all around them,
primed for my suggestion that i rule the world!
zounds!
another good one, brain!
oh, wait.
no, no.
um...
the frequency needs to be an exact integral multiple
of the input, doesn't it?
or, um, it will be all wobble-wobble.
not hypnotic at all.
nope, won't work.
yes.
hmm.
you're right.
too bad.
[brain] well, here's another.
by converting our cage into a nuclear reactor,
we can produce enough energy
uh-uh.
your migration area is tiny, brain.
the neutron will never be able to slow down
from fission to thermal in here.
please, pinky, let me finish.
i mean, it's got to be at least 1/6
of the mean square distance between
please stop!
but, brain
pinky!
it seems to me, brain, that it's not my fault at all
that these plans haven't worked.
well, of course it is.
look!
i figured it out myself.
the numbers don't lie.
hmm...
actually, there seems to be
a little boo-boo right here.
oh, here, too.
and here.
oh, yes.
lots of errors.
stop it, pinky!
stop!
these...
this...
it's preposterous what you're saying!
it's--it's ridiculous!
it's absurd!
but--but, brain.
just go.
just move away from me.
go!
but...
narf.
no.
no!
it is me.
oh, no.
oh!
no...
uh...
no!
he's even smarter than i!
smarter!
accepting my own errors.
the team needs balance.
balance...
yes.
therefore, to successfully take over the world,
a sacrifice must be made.
one of us must be an imbecile.
i liked it better when it was,
no, pinky," this, bop on the head.
no, pinky," that, bop on the head.
but now...
egad!
being a smarty is no fun.
brain doesn't like me.
i mean, we haven't even tried
to take over the world once tonight.
i'm smart enough now.
i could do it!
47 aught 6.
19 kelvin.
fibonacci "n" plus one...
coming.
narf!
coming...
[whistle blows]
pinky.
oh, pink--oof!
ha ha!
pinky, look at me!
i'm a ninny, a wooden-headed dum-dum.
duh!
not a smart thought in my whole empty head.
narf!
narf to the world.
what are we going to do tonight, pinky?
poit!
i say, poit!
pinky?
[machine turns on]
ha ha ha!
it's good to be back!
brain, i fixed it.
i'm a nitwit!
ha ha!
hurrah!
i've fixed it, as well, pinky.
i'm as dense as a tree stump.
you mean...
yes.
well, we'll just have to make you smart again,
won't we?
we can't, pinky.
we're both too stupid to operate the machine.
what do you want to do tonight, brain?
same thing we do every night, pinky.
what's that?
i have no idea.
poit.
narf.
* they're dinky *
* they're pinky and the brain *
* brain, brain, brain, brain *
[pinky] and now, the parts of the brain,
performed by...
the brain!
yes.
* neocortex, frontal lobe *
* brainstem, brainstem
* hippocampus, neural node
* right hemisphere
* pons and cortex visual
* brainstem, brainstem *
* sylvian fissure, pineal
* left hemisphere
* cerebellum, left
* cerebellum, right
* synapse, hypothalamus
* striatum, dendrite
* axon fibers
* matter gray
* brainstem, brainstem *
* central tegmental pathway
* temporal lobe
* white core matter, forebrain, skull *
* brainstem, brainstem
* central fissure, cord spinal *
* parietal
* pia mater, meningeal vein
* medulla oblongata and lobe limbic *
* microelectrodes
narf!
* the brain!
that ought to keep the little squirts happy.
yes!
captioning made possible by warner bros.
__file_terminal__
male narrator:
next, on ice road truckers...
welcome to the twilight zone
again.
narrator:
the pressure is on
for lisa's most important run of
the season.
i think i'm ready to kind of
step up the game a little bit.
narrator:
two ice road
veterans get ready to throw
down.
i'm not here to make friends,
i'm here to ke money.
narrator:
and a monster storm
smashes into atigun pass.
i'm gonna get this tank there
tonight, storm or no storm.
narrator:
turning the dash
for the cash into a fight for
survival.
we're at the eye of the
storm, the mouth of the beast.
the way it looks here, we
might be lucky if we make it out
of here.
narrator:
these are the
truckers who make their living
on thin ice.
* livin' on the edge *
[laughs] * you can't help yourself * * you can't help yourself * * livin' on the edge * * you can't help yourself * * from fallin' * * livin' on the edge *
* yeah * * yeah *
narrator: 50 miles outside
of prudhoe bay...
alex debogorski is headed south
on the vast, open tundra of the
north slope.
weather changes quickly across
the flat planes.
and, for the second week in a
row, alex finds himself in the
middle of a blinding snowstorm.
yep, she's starting to get
worse in here.
well, you can see the fingers of
snow, the little snowdrifts
that are starting to reach out
into the road.
the bad thing about this is
we really can't see if anybody's
coming.
you can't tell the difference
between the horizon and the
ground.
i got a good 100 yards before i
see the oncoming truck.
uh-oh.
oh, my god.
holy mackerel.
the way it looks here, we might
be lucky if we make it out of
here.
narrator: 450 miles south
in fairbanks, the sky is clear
and lisa kelly is ready to roll.
mornin', tim.
ah, we got a phone call
yesterday, and all the vsms that
we're hauling, very hot.
got about 15 loads to move in
the next couple of days, so...to
make the deadline for the
customer.
[chuckles]
have a good trip.
thanks.
narrator:
lisa's load of vsm
pipe, or vertical support
member pipe, is used to keep the
alaska pipeline above ground.
when the pipeline was
constructed, engineers needed a
design that would prevent the 135-degree oil from damaging
permafrost in fragile areas.
as a result, more than 74,000
pieces of vsm pipe were
installed.
at the time it was finished, the 400-mile pipeline was the
longest in the world.
the pipe needs to be in prudhoe
bay in the next 48 hours, and
lisa wants to prove she can
handle the responsibility.
i think i'm ready to kind of
step up the game a little bit.
i want to make the best use of
my time as possible, as long as
i'm here, 'cause i'm not here to
play;
i'm here to make money.
ja ja, go ahead.
narrator:
but lisa's plans
are about to change.
no.
what is going on with that...
bull [bleep]?
narrator:
with a phase three
storm waiting for her at the
pass and time running out on her
load, getting this job done is
going to take some luck and some
smart moves.
it's kind of a gamble, you
know?
we could be stupid and get right
in the middle of the storm and
have the prospect of running out
of fuel or food or something
like that.
or do i want to...
sit at
coldfoot and wait it out?
we're gonna get to coldfoot and
then we're gonna figure out
what's going on up the road.
i was hoping to have a quick
trip, but, you know, whatever.
we take it as it comes.
narrator: 250 miles north,
j8at chandalar station...
the department of transportation
is already hard at work.
that big arctic high is
coming in.
coming in from siberia, and it's
gonna blow like hell.
we're talkin' 40, 50, maybe even 60 miles an hour by this
evening.
narrator:
a phase three
storm means whiteout conditions,
and it's up to the d.o.t. to
keep the driver's safe.
i'm gonna put out a travel
advisory to the office, and
they'll bring it out there, and
the truckers will know what's
going on as the day goes on.
it's gonna get worse and worse,
though.
take care.
be safe.
narrator:
as the d.o.t. crew
rolls out to clear the roads,
reid bahnson heads off on a
bigger mission...
avalanche patrol.
with this blow that's going
on, i wouldn't be surprised to
see a couple small avalanches
come out of this thing.
narrator:
an avalanche could
shut down the road, stranding
drivers like lisa in the storm.
reid is on the lookout, and he
doesn't like what he sees.
this blow is just getting
started.
narrator:
while the storm
bears down on atigun pass, 150
miles north in prudhoe bay...
hey, ray.
mr. vellieux.
hey, any...any loads or
anything?
narrator:
rookie ray
vellieux hopes to make a few
extra bucks on a return load to
fairbanks.
[laughter]
you saw what it's like
outside, right?
yeah.
last time out...
wa...
shoot!
rookie crap.
narrator:
a nightmare run
pushed ray to the brink.
i'm gonna quit and put in my
resignation papers.
narrator:
but with his
family back in montana counting
on him, ray's gotta stick it
out.
i've got, uh, a deck set with
some dunnage on it, but, guess
what...
you know how to put chains on
and tie a deck down?
uh...
[laughing] nuh-huh.
narrator:
even if it means
braving 45 below weather to lock
down his own load.
so i gotta tie the deck down
and all that stuff?
if you want it, it needs to
be tied down.
well, ray, a nice guy would
come out and help you.
all right, let's go do it.
narrator:
lucky for ray,
veteran hauler tim bishop is
willing to lend a hand.
[wind whipping]
uhh.
damn!
narrator:
to ready-raise back
haul for the road, they have to
bind the stacked trailers
together using chains.
uhh!
[indistinct]
here it comes; watch out.
uhh!
well...
[grunting]
hang on to it.
ohh.
narrator:
with winds kicking
up to 50 miles an hour...
frostbite can occur in minutes.
ohh.
narrator:
a job that usually
takes 20 minutes stretches past
the hour mark...
and the risk of
exposure grows.
ohh.
narrator:
coming up...
[crash]
ray fights to keep his tires on
the road.
while the betties crew tries
not to go through it.
whoa, whoa!
whoa, whoa, whoa!
narrator:
in the blizzard
that swallowed prudhoe bay...
ray vellieux and tim bishop are
battling freezing winds and
blowing snow...
to lock down ray's back haul.
[puffing]
narrator:
an hour into the
job, the brutal arctic
conditions have begun to take
their toll.
ohh.
uhh.
ohh.
narrator:
finally, the deck
is secured.
but with the blizzard
building, ray may be stuck in
prudhoe for some time.
200 miles south...
welcome to the twilight zone
again.
narrator:
alex has spent the
last two hours battling the
storm.
road's starting to close up.
then the drifts started getting
deeper.
and the next step is being
buried.
narrator:
just as the road is
about to vanish...
alex spots a grater working up
ahead.
i've just come into an area
where the grater is busy making
a pass, so it's a little easier
to see the road now.
narrator:
the grater is a
sure sign that he's approaching
coldfoot.
well, this is a blessing.
see, now we got a road to watch.
narrator:
and to alex, a sign
that someone even higher than
the d.o.t. is looking out for
him.
my faith helps me through
whatever challenges i have to
face in life.
i thank god for, uh, his
blessings and help.
narrator: 300 miles south in
the clear skies of fairbanks,
hugh rowland is ready for his
next load.
oh, hey, hugh, good morning.
ready to head up north, another
load of pipe?
you betcha.
weather up there's pretty
bad.
narrator:
nasty weather is
nothing new for the veteran
polar bear.
but to carlile, hugh is just
another second-year rookie.
this morning, we're gonna
have you follow jack jessee up,
hugh.
we're just pairing guys up for,
you know, just more safety.
hey, i should learn how to
drive if he's in front of me,
huh?
oh, yeah.
you're gonna run that up.
just follow him up there.
all right?
check.
they don't want you to travel
alone when there's a storm on.
and so then they put me in with
a gunamed jack jessee there,
'cause i guess he's the king of
the dalton.
narrator:
as he waits for
jack, the polar bear chafes at
the idea he needs a babysitter.
so now i'm suckin' hind tit
here, so i gotta make a move to
get at 'er.
and hopefully, we can get the
[bleep] underway here, soon as
possible.
come on.
damn it.
i been waiting for king james
there for three hours already
this morning.
i know they want us to travel
together, but it's already noon.
narrator:
the company may
want him to run with jack, but
the polar bear didn't make it to
the top playing by someone
else's rules.
king jessee, uh, i'll meet up
with him at coldfoot.
i just wanted to get going.
i mean, i gotta make some money
here.
they can think whatever they
want about me.
most of 'em always think i'm an
[bleep].
they can shove it.
narrator: 60 minutes later,
jack is finally ready to roll.
so we're getting a little bit
later start than i really would
have liked to have had.
but that's okay, because there's
a big storm up there rig now,
and i need to make sure it dies
out and moves through.
and that way, i can drive
straight in.
narrator:
but with the storm
raging at atigun pass...
jack's in no hurry to drive into
the heart of it.
well, we've got a vac truck.
they really need it up here
tonight, so they can get this
thing fired up.
they use these vac trucks to for
potable water.
these exploratory man camps
they've got out searching for
more oil rely on the trucks like
this to drive out to 'em...
and...and fill up their holding
tanks.
the area up here is so arid,
it's just like a desert.
you can dehydrate here just as
fast or faster than you can out
in the sahara desert.
most people think the biggest
danger up here is freezing to
death.
but the second most dangerous
thing is dehydration.
narrator:
the company is
counting on him, and the haul
road ace has no intention of
letting them down.
i'm getting this tank there
tonight, storm or no storm.
[horn honks]
narrator: 170 miles northwest
of fairbanks is the isolated
town of bettles, alaska.
the only lifeline to this town
of 60 people is the fleet of big
rigs owned and operated by merv
gilbertson.
i've got 12 loads to get over
that trail in less than 30 days.
if i don't get that done,
they don't get their fuel.
narrator:
for just a few
weeks each year, the jim river
freezes, creating a bridge for
merv's trucks to supply the
town...
but conditions on the
river change hour by hour.
wow.
man, it's not looking good, is
it?
narrator:
so each trip before
merv's big rigs can roll, he's
got to test the ice.
but i don't hear any
cracking, so that's...that's
comforting.
yeah, what a mess.
it looks doable.
i think we can, uh, i think we
can make it across.
well...
as you come down right
there, you're definitely gonna
fall through.
narrator:
merv has his
doubts.
i think we'll give it a try.
narrator:
but jamie ellingson
from the d.o.t. thinks it's
worth a test run in his 3 1/2
ton pickup.
whoa, whoa!
whoa, whoa, whoa!
oh, damn!
narrator:
the ice begins to
crumble around the pickup.
whoa.
[tires grinding]
[ice cracking]
narrator:
jamie makes a quick
move and backs up onto more
solid ice.
merv's plan to reach bettles
today is just as shaky as the
frozen river crossing.
put a loaded truck on this...
that's not good.
the last time we encountered
something like this, we did
about $10,000 worth of damage.
narrator:
but jamie's not
ready to give up.
okay.
[laughing] success!
narrator:
the good news:
jamie's super duty ford and his
pride made it across the thin
ice unharmed.
the bad news:
there's no way
merv is gonna risk his 50,000
pound big rigs to get across.
well, i feel bad for the
residents because it's gonna
take a while before this freezes
solid again.
they want you to come across,
but they know the story.
if...if you can't, you can't.
and right now...
you can't.
[laughs]
narrator:
back in
fairbanks...
mornin', boss.
greg, how we doing?
narrator:
greg is ready to
head north.
and the pass is supposed to
hit 30 to 40 miles an hour
tonight.
so we got a lot of guys sitting
at coldfoot right now.
but i don't think you're gonna
get over the pass.
[wind whipping]
narrator:
with the blow at
atigun getting worse by the
hour, carlile isn't about to
send a young driver like greg
into the heart of it.
we're going to coldfoot.
we're gonna drop this trailer
there.
turn around, bog tail back into
fairbanks.
narrator:
after greg makes
his first trip, he'll return to
fairbanks, reload, and complete
a second haul to coldfoot.
they don't want to send us up
into this weather where we're
just gonna be stuck there
burning up fuel, costing the
company money and...
there's just
really no point.
narrator:
by only going
halfway, greg is spared facing
the storm.
but the narrow road...
and hairpin turns on the first
stretch of the dalton are no
cake walk.
coming up on a nasty corner
here.
northbound 25.
this is 25 mile corner.
uphill, blinleft.
big drop on either side.
sometimes you can't help it if
the traction's pretty poor.
with this heavy load and this
corner...
one of my primary...
[clunk]
hold on.
oh, [bleep].
narrator:
at 25 mile corner,
greg boadwine's tires are losing
their grip.
[clunk]
ooh, hold on.
oh, [bleep].
i've wiped my feet in bigger
[bleep] than right there.
wiping my feet means that,
literally, the tires had
traction, completely lost
traction.
all four of them spun at the
same time.
luckily, i had time to get out
of the throttle fast enough to
save it.
on a corner like, on the steep
little grade, if i had spun
right there, there's no telling
if i would have been able to get
the trailer and the truck brakes
locked without us sliding
backwards into the the guard
rail, at least, if not over.
narrator:
as the sun fades
and the temperature drops...
the storm rages on in the north.
after an entire day spent
battling the blow, alex finally
reaches coldfoot...
looking for a hot meal and a
place to rest.
alex, how's it going?
i've got something for you.
you have something for me?
i can't imagine what.
narrator:
but the only thing
on the menu tonight is
humiliation.
goodness grief.
does that look familiar?
vaguely familiar.
narrator:
on his second run
of the season...
i think we're coming down
here a little quicker than we're
wanna be going.
[clunk clunk]
narrator:
alex took out two
road delineators.
you knock down about 100 more
of these, you're gonna be driver
of the year.
maybe i should autograph it
for you.
you can put it up on the wall.
oh, yeah, definitely.
[laughs]
i need one of these, you know?
that's one thing i dn't have.
what to give a man that has
everything, eh?
narrator:
a fellow driver
left one of the delineators as a
joke.
but to alex, a shot at his
driving skills is nothing to
laugh about.
it's not really a big deal.
i mean, a lot of people seem to
get excited, and they're making
a big deal out of it.
i have a really hard time
believing that i'm the worst
driver in this room.
narrator:
as alex pushes
south, northbound jack jessee
reaches the truck stop.
well, there are a lot of
trucks here in coldfoot.
something's wrong.
truck drivers don't like to sit
and wait.
it pretty much tells me that the
roads are closed somewhere.
we going or what?
well, they said it's blowing
over there.
we don't want to get stopped on
the side of the hill.
no.
so nobody else wants to go up
and over the pass, huh?
no, everybody else is...well,
most of 'em are in the bar,
so...
oh, okay.
[laughs]
yeah.
yep.
boy, i don't mind going up
here and having a good
challenge.
but if it's too dangerous and
too unsafe, then i'm not gonna
do that.
narrator: 20 minutes behind
jack...
[horn honks]
we're just about to pull into
coldfoot here.
narrator:
greg rolls in.
he'll drop his trailer and head
back to fairbanks to pick up
another load.
inside, it seems everybody is
stuck at coldfoot tonight.
hi.
have a seat.
my gosh, what are you doing?
oh, just waiting out the
storm. [laughs]
not dropping?
i'm not allowed to.
you got the vsms.
why, are you?
yeah, i got pipe.
i got pipe.
i'm dropping it and going back
to fairbanks.
better than sitting here.
hauling a hot load means lisa
doesn't ve the option to drop
her trailer.
she's stuck waiting until the
storm blows over, unless...
hey, you want to sit here,
and i'll go back?
do i get your dispatch and
your pay for bringing it this
way?
yeah.
hey, if you want to, yeah.
if i can have your pay for
bringing this pipe up this way.
negative.
you're horrible at making
contracts and bargains.
you're gonna have to really
sweeten that deal if you want me
to take your vsms.
well, it ain't gonna...the
more i sweeten it, the more it
sucks for me, and it already
sucks to be me, so...
well...
i don't think i'm gonna
sweeten your deal any.
narrator:
while lisa sits and
waits, greg turns and burns,
heading south away from the
storm.
i feel good.
truck's running good.
conditions are beautiful.
just gonna roll on into
fairbanks tonight.
narrator:
morning in prudhoe
bay.
road's open!
so we're out of here.
narrator:
after 24 hours
stuck in prudhoe watching his
chance for extra cash slip
away...
ray and a few other
drivers are ready to roll the
dice and head south into the
storm.
we're heading back to
fairbanks.
we've been stuck here in prudhoe
bay.
now we got a little gap in the
weather, and everybody's gonna
make a run for it.
because they're talking about
weather blowing back in tonight.
pretty strange weather up here.
you just can't predict it.
it can kill you out here.
but we'll all stick together and
bust through the drifts and get
out of here.
narrator:
50-mile-an-hour
winds have blown snowdrifts onto
the road.
a new hazard for the rookie.
driving on ice through drifts of
snow can easily send a trucker
skidding out of control.
here's a wreck up here.
whoa.
that...
sucks.
well, maybe he caught a drift or
something...
and he went right
off the road.
narrator:
as ray and his
convoy push south...
conditions are even worse than
he imagined.
why, is there a problem up
there?
yeah, i'm about 100 yards, i
think, behind john, and i can't
even see him.
holy mackerel.
narrator:
for the last 24
hours, a phase three storm has
hammered atigun pass, bringing
traffic to a halt and
threatening to destroy anyone
who enters.
but now, word has come in that a
few trucks are headed out to
take on the pass.
i'm gettin' ready to go.
narrator:
anxious to prove
she can deliver her urgent load
on time, lisa wants to be in the
first group leaving coldfoot.
i am gonna be sitting in my
truck behind the steering wheel
like this.
and as soon as i see someone
walk out and get in their truck,
i'm gonna let the clutch out.
[laughs]
watch out!
i'm comin' through.
[honk honk]
all right, let's get out of
here.
narrator:
as the first trucks
leave the yard, lisa jumps in
line, ready to race north.
and i'm running with a whole
pack of people, so i got two
scouts in front of me.
long as they don't ditch me,
we're gonna fight this storm out
together.
you don't go trucking in a storm
without a buddy.
i am so glad to be out of
coldfoot.
it looks like it's getting a
little hairy up there.
narrator:
back in coldfoot,
with trucks beginning to roll
north, the polar bear takes one
more shot at being a company
man.
hey, you, what's happening.
not much.
what time did you
get in last night?
i don't remember.
don't remember.
[laughing]
what time you pulling out of
here?
uh, when i get done with
this, i think.
what'd you hear about the road?
i haven't heard anything yet.
i just kind of heard that
it's open.
well, i'm gonna go get ready to
go, and then, uh, we'll head up
together if you're...
want to, or whatever.
doesn't matter.
yeah, sure, i just...really
just gotta get done here, and
should be good to go.
all right, i'll talk to you
after a bit.
okay.
we will see you out there.
i'm just kind of sitting
here waiting on king james
there, and...
apparently he's gonna be another
hour.
i had a couple old timers one
time tell me, "do not pass up a
warm meal on this road.
you get a chance to stop and get
one, get it, because...
you never
know what's gonna happen.
and i asked him what time he
was leaving, and...
i don't know, i, uh...
like i said, he's pretty full of
himself.
well, i think he was ready to
go, but...
i'm not done eating.
so...
i'm not gonna leave all
this good food just sitting
here.
narrator:
since jack won't
join him, hugh makes a plan to
beat him.
he'll dodge the storm and rack
up two loads to jack's one.
i gotta go in and phone
dispatch.
see if i can drop my load here
and...
go get another one, so at
least i'm not behind the game so
far.
hey, i'm up at coldfoot here.
i guess it's storming up there.
i was just wondering if i could
drop my load here and come back
for another one and stockpile a
couple.
okay, thanks.
so i'll grab another one and
burn 'er back up here.
i'll get my load count up.
the end of march comes around,
i'm laid off.
so i'm here to get as many loads
i can, and that's the whole
idea for me.
narrator:
once again, hugh
proves that nothing's gonna
stand between the polar bear and
his paycheck.
i'm not here to make friends.
i'm here to make money
[clears throat]
narrator:
as hugh heads south
into clear skies, lisa heads
north into the storm.
[indistinct radio chatter]
it's worse than i thought it
was gonna be out here.
i mean, there's definitely
pretty good snow drifts.
i mean, look at this.
there's like a wall.
you can see right to there, and
then you can't see anything past
that.
narrator:
it's not long
before lisa and her convoy are
forced off the road to wait.
uh-oh.
okay.
all right, sounds good.
we're at the eye of the storm.
the mouth of the beast.
we're right there.
narrator:
just over the pass
and heading south...
he's gotta drive with his
backup lights on, so it looks
like headlights coming at me.
and that's what i'm looking for:
to see him through the drifts.
oh, is that a vehicle?
narrator:
ray's eagerness to
leave prudhoe isn't looking like
a good decision.
it's hard to tell if...
is that him?
that's him.
it's hard to tell if it was
somebody coming at me or him
driving away from me.
it's the only lights i can see.
i'm happy i'm with these guys,
that's for sure.
i wouldn't want to be doing this
stuff alone.
not right now.
just too at it, you know?
narrator:
word comes over the
radio that even the d.o.t. road
crews have headed for shelter.
damn, it keeps getting worse.
welcome to the haul road.
that little window of
opportunity we had is slamming
shut on us.
all right, i'm pulling up right
now.
narrator:
overwhelmed by the
blow, ray and his convoy have no
choice but to pull over.
well, now the plan is...
pretty ugly.
we're gonna be up here at 117.
we're gonna meet with everybody.
and...
them guys can make a call,
see what they want to do.
uhh.
ugh.
sure wish we were still in
prudhoe.
[laughter]
it's closed in front of us.
it's closed behind us.
we're stuck in the middle.
[laughs] yeah.
we're here alone, man.
oh, yeah.
and best thing to do for us
is just to...
stop and get
everything buttoned up and try
and stay warm, keep everything
running, and...
hopefully it'll quit by tomorrow
morning.
all right, well, let's get
in and get warm.
right on.
it's gonna be a long night.
that sucks.
idle up the truck, keep the
heat on.
ugh.
narrator:
caught in the nasty
phase three blow on atigun, ray,
lisa, and nearly every truck on
the pass have taken refuge on
the side of the road.
we're at the eye of the
storm.
narrator:
the hard deadline
for lisa's vsm pipe is only
hours away.
now, at the first sign of a
break in the weather...
she's ready to take her chances
to make sure her first hot load
isn't her last.
come on, let's go.
right now...
we're rollin',
and i'm following my crew.
[laughs]
holy crap, look at that.
we are a convoy.
[laughing] that's awesome.
i guess we're gonna be the first
to break the trail.
narrator:
with the d.o.t.
crew still down, the roads are
unplowed, leaving lisa and her
convoy to cut their own trail.
i can't see anything right
now.
narrator:
a wrong turn here
could send lisa plunging off the
cliff.
i'm trying to remain calm and
keep my mind clear.
can you see the edge of the
road?
'cause i sure can't.
drifted pretty good here.
let's hope there's no snowbanks,
'cause i can't see if there is.
hmm.
lost the delineators there.
there we go.
i got a long hood, and i can't
see over it.
narrator:
finally, lisa and
her convoy break through.
well, we're still on the
road.
[laughs]
narrator:
over the pass with
clear road ahead, lisa's first
hot load will get in under the
wire.
we're all moving along.
there shouldn't be any problems.
there's good visibility.
got ourselves a convoy.
narrator:
on the north side
of atigun, the sound of lisa's
convoy rolling by inspires ray
and the other drivers to make
their own run through the pass.
there's plenty of snow on the
pass, that's for sure.
you got big drifts here.
big drifts.
ooh.
oh, that's ugly.
all the other trucks busted a...
a little trail through here.
so as long as we stay in their
tracks, we'll be all right.
a lot of the guys were talking
about avalanche danger.
it's been snowing', blowin'.
and all the snow gets packed in
one certain spot and gets heavy,
and then it lets go and...
oh, yeah, trucks have been hit
by avalanches right here and
knocked over the guard rail.
we'll just get through here and
get out of here.
narrator:
it's not long
before ray, too, fights through
the dying storm to safety.
the worst of it's over now.
we're off of atigun.
and we're heading back to
fairbanks.
narrator:
an hour later, jack
jessee makes the 4,700 foot
climb to find that his plan has
paid off.
well, i can see the top
again.
i think i'm gonna make it.
narrator:
while lisa and ray
spent a freezing night stranded
in the pass, jack waited out the
storm, safe and warm in
coldfoot.
made it up atigun again.
northbound, going down atigun.
narrator:
with a clear road
ahead, it's a straight shot to
prudhoe bay.
as jack rolls in, the vat truck
crews have been waiting for is
now on hand.
well, we finally made it.
the weather caused a little bit
of problems there, so it's a day
later than they wanted it.
but i got it here.
they'll work on getting it
started and getting it delivered
tomorrow.
uh, all i want to do is try to
get out of here and get home.
narrator:
as the storm
settles down, the dash for the
cash is just heating up.
[honking horn]
jack's slow and steady strategy
got him safely through the storm
to deliver his fifth load.
gr]g and hugh avoided the chaos
of atigun, and both racked up
quick trips,
while lisa, alex, and ray ran
the gauntlet, keeping the race
tight between all drivers.
next week, on ice road truckers,
the most urgent haul of the
season...
it's critical that we get
this fuel up to them.
could be a dangerous situation
if they run out.
hits a bump in the road.
oop!
uhh!
narrator:
lisa gets another
shot at a heavy haul.
it's definitely a test.
wanna prove that i can do it.
narrator:
archrivals push
each other's buttons.
you need me to throw you a
rope or what?
come on.
[laughs]
narrator:
and the rookie...
pushes himself to the limit.
__file_terminal__
ah, this is greasy.
i want to eat kimchee.
is chae yoon's coordinator in here?
excuse me, aren't you chae yoon's coordinator?
yes.
me?
chae yoon is done singing.
this lady right next to me... everyone knows who she is right?
she is my forever idol...she is my rival whom i can never win against, she is the one who always makes me happy, and she is my mother.
everyone should remember my mom as one of the greatest movie stars, but instead of becoming an actress, she wanted to become a singer just like me.
when i was stressed and exhausted, she'd always sing me a song while having me on her lap.
today, i would like to share that moment with everyone.
watch out!
no moonhyuk.
no!
you cannot work yourself out.
you're not normal.
in your head, there is still a bullet left.
didn't you hear it from the doctor...
you're back, are you?
i knew you would be.
...i knew you would.
go to korea.
i packed your airplane ticket, some clothes and enough money to last you till you die.
hurry up and go.
it's this evening's flight.
if you go home you'll die.
jason is trying to kill you.
that car a while ago was sent by jason.
he burned all the pictures we've taken together.
i'm sorry that this is what i can do for you.
you saved our lives, but i can only do this for you and i'm very sorry.
if he kills me, then i'll die.
even if you die, go die in korea.
don't die here like a dog,
go to our country and die, moonhyuk.
am i dying?
oh poison!
you tasted this and died.
oh careless love!
why die and not a drop of poison left for me?
oh sword...
my heart be the dagger's sheath.
let me to death!
lead me to romeo.
let's have you come out as an entertainer.
you might get nominated for an academic award.
when did you come?
i thought it would take about 30 minutes.
hey sister...
i think it's time for you to come out to the world.
let's go to the studio.
i'll be your manager.
a customer came to buy a laundry machine and took a catalogue.
stop fooling around and do a great job!
i'm going.
how long will you keep suffering inside to be yoon's coordinator?
i think you have the potential to be great.
i'm not saying just because i'm your sister.
well you might not be good as kang min joo...but you...
i know myself more than you.
you do well.
do you know how hard it was for me to get you employed here with the help of yoon.
if you get fired...
yoon?
okay.
i'll be there soon.
what did yoon do now?
seriously there's not a day where you can just relax.
i'm going to go.
see you at home.
okay, go.
go.
i also had an accident.
they told me to work only today and not come back from tomorrow.
my swearing boss said.
he's handsome.
if he were rich, how great that would be.
ah, he's handsome.
cha moonhyuk, it is true that you were adopted right?
yes.
you must not have memories of your mother or the country korea.
i don't remember anything.
i hope everyone forgives cha moonhyuk's speaking.
he didn't learn the proper speaking of korean
i hope everyone understands him.
yes, let's bring cha moonhyuk on stage.
here.
to find your family, is there any special things you can do or have anything that was given to you before you were adopted.
we're on live right now.
this must be a remembered necklace.
so is this what you had when you were adopted?
when and how did you get it?
don't know.
can you please show it in front of the camera.
that necklace is pretty.
where did i see that.
it doesn't seem like a necklace from here.
can you get out and ask the lady where she got that necklace?
can you ask?
yes, yes ma'am.
is that platinum or silver?
put it back on!
we have to keep watching so we can find you're family.
no...
i'm going to watch 'janggoo'.
wait a second.
let me just watch a minute of it.
no!
mom!
i'm going to watch 'janggoo'.!
turn in back to 'janggoo' kim galchi!
after reading this, he disappeared during the rehearsal.
what are we going to do?
let me try to find him.
wipe it with this.
forget it.
when i meet my mother, i'll ask her to wipe it for me.
a woman is is the way...
to a woman... haht..hah'....
saeng.
saeng ni eh sae.
you're dumb, how can you not know how to read korean?
hey, where are you hitting my child?
what a strange man.
are you okay?
oh, saeng ni eh sae.
i love you.
the only thing i love is you.
you know right?
what the heck is that?
go and see.
we're in the middle of shooting can you please be quiet?
please help us.
sorry.
what kind of person is this!
hey!
can't you see we're shooting?
sorry!
i'll try to solve the problem.
if you just go, i'll hurry and solve the problem.
open the door!
yoon, please don't do this.
please,
please don't do this.
what are you going to do if reporters see this.
i don't get it.
i seriously don't understand that girl.
i'm going nuts!
i'm gonna die!
am i your servant?
do you want to die?
studio?
pd?
where?
chae moonhyuk.
nice to meet you.
let's go.
no, i want to drink this.
mom, you order that one.
i ordered the coke
no, i orderd the cola.
after watching the show, that little boy gave us a call..
he told us that his mother has the same exact looking necklace as yours.
it's mine!
it's because my mom had an accident along time ago.
at age seven, a grandpa told me that she got hit by a trunk infront of a church and hurt her head.
this... read it.
read what's incribed in your ring.
don't know.
i don't know.
can't your mother read?
is your mom stupid to read words?
she's not stupid.
if she can't read, how is she not stupid?
it's because she hasn't learned all the alphabet.
she can read up to gah, nah, dah, lah, mah, bah, sah.
read what's written.
for-ev-er...?
forever?
you can't read words too?
there are some words i can, and some words i can't.
i'm not stupid.
compare to your mom, i'm a 1000 times smarter!
forver... together...
you do you know me?
you...
who are you?
suh kyung.
yoon
suh kyung.
eunchae, let's go home and make and eat spicy rice cake.
ok...
i'm going to forget.
minjoo
from this time, i'll completely forget her.
without any dusk, i'm going to completely erase her.
bye kang min joo.
it's goodbye forever!
don't lie.
grab a taxi and go home.
i want to say something to minjoo.
i'll say something and go.
so you go home first.
you have money for taxi, right?
i do.
i'm drinking soju and i'll come back.
want to wait for me?
i'll take a shot, come back, and do something about minjoo
i'll tell her not to make you sad and grab her hair and shake.
i'll break her legs so that she can't meet anyone.
yah, it's time for her to get beaten up.
wait a second, i'll be back.
don't lay a hand on her.
it's not minjoo's fault
she's already warned me first.
i'm the crazy one.
i'll wait.
finish him off and come back.
it's also find if you come without finishing him.
i'll finish it off for you.
you probably have to wait along time.
i started to date him just a week ago.
i can wait.
a month is enough right?
chae yoon.
you bastard!
why hit him?
forever..
together...
forever
together
there's not a day when a grown up girl's face isn't ruined.
it's scary to see a scab fall off!
i'm alright, it doesn't hurt.
say you're alright one more time, i'm leaving you on the streets!
i say that i'm alright because i'm alright, and it doesn't hurt because it doesn't hurt.
being alright?
not hurt?
are you made of metal?
are you a robot?
why'd you come out from there?
are you 119?
it really doesn't hurt.
get out.
fine, it hurts.
it hurts so much i can die.
i'm not alright.
i'll never be alright.
not even after i die.
how sad.
so much i can die.
what can we do...
chae moonhyuk and yoon suh kyung, i went to the orphanage you guys went to.
you two were twins.
tw-ins?
the necklace was on you two the whole time.
that's all i know.
buy wrapped rice.
one please!
wrapped rice!
how much?
two dollars.
give me one.
yes.
sir, this is a dollar.
give me two.
why do you always cheat?
what do you mean cheat?
you always cheat.
why do you take my customers?
your customer, my customer...they're not the same.
yours are yours, mine are mine.
and that's that.
that's not right!
how much is all this?
is that enough?
buy these, buy these.
i'll give them to you half price.
why is your mom sleeping that way?
it's because she wraps rice at night.
i'll give you all these for 300 dollars.
i mean 200 dollars.
if you admit you cheated, i'll buy everything here.
ok, i did.
i cheated.
if you cheat on the boy again,
i won't leave you alone.
sukchae hurry and wake up.
the sun is up your butt hole you guys!
wake up!
i thought it was settled for a while.
how did your eye become a black eye?
i fell while i was walking.
it's going to be alright after two days.
it's ok.
instead of being yoon's coordinator, you following with gangsters?
samchae's mom!
she's in the room.
you going to the groceries?
i'm going.
why are you wearing sunglasses inside the room?
you do ssangkapeul surgery?
hurry and come out.
i have to take ma'am to the studio shortly.
after i earn a lot of money, i'm moving out of this house just to avoid hearing about her.
i'm going grocery shopping with dad, so go up and peal onions.
am i getting pregnant.
i can't smell onions.
are there people coming to yoon's house?
yoon's mother.
she's getting ready for "self camera
she's putting on a show off her famous son.
how arrogant.
stop with the bad remarks.
mom, you get botox?
okay..mom the camera is rolling.
don't get nervous...okay, 1, 2...
just like this, drinking coffee with my son is my joy and life.
ah, let's record again.
i seriously think this lipstick doesn't fit me well.
why?
it's pretty.
i'll be showing you my precious son.
hello, i'm chae yoon.
i heard my mom was doing a self camera, so...
i'm just cutting in a little.
mom, can i say something to you?
what?
say it.
say it...
mother, go over there and sit.
you see,
when i think about my mother, i'm really thankful and shed tears.
having me born to this world,
raising me up so perfectly,
and always giving me so much love.
mom, you are my sunshine and idol.
you know that right?
i love you, mom.
i love you
you're not supposed to act like that to an adult.
that lady is also a sad lady.
later on, tell her that you're sorry.
say that you're sorry, okay?
no.
mister, are you a gangster?
yes.
what is your name?
galshi.
the same galchi you cook with.
is that your name?
yes.
what grade are you in?
i don't go to school.
even though i don't go to school, i can read korean.
speak a little english.
i'm pretty smart.
what about your father?
i don't have those.
hey grandpa!
oh hey.
let's each samkyupsal.
this is the guy i met.
the guy who has the necklace.
the guy who is from australia.
your eyes take after your mom's eyes, a lot.
quite similar.
have you ate samkyupsal before?
how about soju?
lay your sister down and come here.
i'll teach you how to eat samkyupsal and drink soju.
i'm sorry.
i'm sorry, eunchae
if no guys come to you because your face is full of injuries...
and if they don't like you, and no one takes you,
then just come to me.
i'll live with you.
come to me.
for real, i'll take care of you.
what's wrong?
water!
what's wrong, song eun-chae?
oh it's nothing...
i'm alright.
why aren't you picking it up?
it's minjoo.
how do i look?
am i pretty?
you're pretty.
how about you, eunchae?
am i pretty?
yes, you're beautiful.
what kind of earring will match with this kind of clothes?
diamond?
ruby?
saphire?
it's better than bacon right?
it's because you have korean taste.
do you... know my mother?
does she live in this neighborhood?
my mother?
no...
why would you mom live in a crappy neighborhood like this?
...very smart.
how'd she get like you...
my mother...
help me meet her.
i'll let you meet her.
it's time for you to meet her.
you.. are all quite smart.
how'd you learn the language so well?
you said this was better than bacon, so eat.
i don't really like this necklace.
thiis necklace and this dress don't match, right?
they are pretty, why?
fake stuff is obvious.
wouldn't the dress look fake too?
didn't you buy that necklace very expensive?
not expensive.
1000 dollars.
a thousand...
is as much as my daughter's tuition.
just wear it.
you look quite glamorous, so it's okay.
is that so?
let's leave, ma'am.
to get to the studio, we're already late.
let's go.
are you a stalker?
mom, sook-chae is trying to hit me.
hurry and raise your hands!
nobody does these kind of things anymore.
look at my age.
how old are you?
a 28 (?
) yo with nothing better things to do so she steals a guy's clothing.
like i said.
if yoon's mom finds out, we'll all get kicked out of this house!
yoon is a star...a star!
and these...these are not yoon's.
these can be considered to be from yoon's fans.
how much is this?
how much do you get exactly?
you gonna buy it?
each one is 30 dollars... with a discount i can give it to you for 150 dollars.
what the...just those are 30 dollars each?
the hankercheif yoon used to wipe his sweat at his concert.
that sold for 50 dollars.
50 dollars?
they put these in auctions.
things used by elvis presley...
those are worth big money!
unbelievable...
at the house...there are many hankerchiefs yoon's used to wipe his face and sweat.
then...we shouldn't washed them, right?
exactly.
so bring them to me.
so bring that and i'll cut you in.
how much would bowls and dishes sell for?
if we consider some things...
about 1000 dollars.
call the police, minchae!
tell them to take these two away.
song eun chae!
are you calling?
i finished him off.
sooner than you expected, huh?
you've become so pale.
aren't you going to take me?
you taking me?
sorry... for confusing you.
i'm making...
chachang ramen.
you want some?
let's go.
who it it?
let me use the restroom.
but who is it?
restroom.
let me use the restroom.
this isn't a public restroom.
i'm going to piss my pants.
let me use it!
piss yourself.
am i stopping you?
what a psycho!
english translations by purpletiger86 subtitles by zdoon
__file_terminal__
cha..
moo..hyuk
i'll make a lot of money.
and go to korea.
wait, mother!
i'll go and place you in luxury.
is it wrong if you think of love as a game too?
later when that person betrays you, hurts you..
have a big heart, don't get heartbroken...
you're not well.
in your head.... there's still a bullet there.
are you korean?
you're korean?
i'm saved!
arrange a meeting with my mother.
of course.
it's about time.
who is it?
let me use the bathroom.
but who is it?
bathroom..
let me use the bathroom!
it's not public.
i'm going to pee my pants.
let me use the bathroom.
then go!
i won't stop you.
what a wacko!
hey!
australia, right?
right?
australia, at melbourne.
don't you remember me?
no.
it seems right?
do you live here?
yes.
maybe he's not the same person?
is this your house?
no, it's not mine.
we just live in the basement for rent.
this house is a rich person's house, right?
yes.
so...
is it a hella rich house?
but hey!
why'd you piss at stranger's house?
why would you do that?
your piss!
i marked this place as my territory.
why?
dogs mark their territory like this.
what the.
how can this place be your territory?
see you again.
i'll come to pee again tomorrow.
what is this.
so is he saying that he's a dog?
wha?
that's right.
i'm a dog.
not a human being.
a dog!
your mom was a famous movie star a long time ago...
and your brother is one of the top singer in our country.
killer, huh?
we found out about it....
you are twins...
what a weird person i meet as i live.
ugh, disgusting.
how filthy!
are you korean?
you're korean?
hey...
i have a husband..
just go to sleep...
if you don't want to die.
jason sent you here.
jason sent you here to kill me!
did you think i'll get tricked?
do you really think i was going to get tricked by you old man!
how can that lady be my mom?
how can that lady be my mom!
she is your mother!
don't lie!
if she lives so great, why would she abondon me?
with that money, she can buy all the milk in the world and raise 1000 children!
it's not like it was hard to live or even starve to death.
how, not one but two why would she abandon me!
your mom is that kind of lady.
anything that gets in her way, children or else?
she's capable of that.
your mom does whatever she wishes.
shut your mouth.
i'm going to kill you.
i'm going to you old man!
why, did your mom cause an accident again?
i don't want to be the mom?
i want to die.
why?
is she in another accident?
then, did he come to find me all the way from australia?
but how'd he know where i live?
is he a wacko?
oh, yoo!
pork?
i'm going to put it in the jajang sauce.
it's not in your fridge?
would you buy some?
yah, with side skins
sure, thanks!
i'm an excellent cook.
tangsooyook, palboochae, galbijim, shinsunyoo, pasta.
i also clean and do laundry extremely well.
there's nothing i can't do well
later, i probably can raise babies well.
i won't let your hands touch water.
well, we have to go there and see?
but i'll be a good match for a husband.
do you like me that much?
of course
ah!
you're in big trouble chae yoon
have you no idea what you want in a women?
don't make me sad anymore.
make me sad again, and i'll really die then.
i'll wait by your house.
i'll wait till you come out.
sorry.
pork...
did he tell me to buy front leg?
or back leg?
or was it side skins?
rock head rock head!
i should die!
you know how much i worked to get that shirt?
give it back..
these girls need to be in jail and eat bean rice to wake them up.
is seems like she didn't know.
why don't you forgive her.
i mean why make a big deal with just one shirt.
just one shirt?
with just this one shirt, i can feed 5 people in my family.
nowadays we don't have much customers and we're about to starve to death.
why did you steal it?
didn't galchi teach you that it's bad to steal clothes?
i gave money.
you did?
sure, if you pays...then i'll...
that doesn't make sense.
are you fallen for her or something?
all the guys in my family and neighborhood have been drooling over her...
if you don't put her in jail, i'll going to bring my lawyer!
why are you crying for?
huh, why are you crying for.
with that brings the end of program...
thank you.
oh you're too kind!
when i look at it we can't praise you enough!
this is too much!
excuse.
let's talk for a minute
couple days ago, there was a morning special adoption show right?
yes, there was.
oh, they must be twins.
how cute.
sorry l contact you again.
i'm sorry but can i hold your baby?
can i feed him for some milk too?
...i'll give you milk.
don't wanna?
he doesn't want any.
your twins are too cute.
i want to raise twins too.
the mother must feel so happy
it hurts...
more gently!
wake up!
the sun is up, you guys!
hamchae!
aigoo, how disgusting.
if i could put you back into my stomache!
sookchae wake up.
wake up!
where's eunchae?
would she fit beneath the bed, mom?
she's with yoon to help him out.
you little!
you'd hit your own mother?
that's what i'm sayin!
sorry!
i think that girl with thick lips recognizes you.
she probably thinks i just look similar.
ah, eat.
in the whole world, eating eggs in the hot room is the best.
you should have gone somewhere else...why on a sunday?
if we get caught, we'll die.
just eat it.
you find it well.
so this is how hot room looks like.
this is fun.
right?
hey, not you too!
don't you know the danger of another scandal broke loose?
i got it.
i'll be careful.
i don't have make up on, they won't recognize me.
fruit ice cream is killer here.
we should come here all the time.
what should we do?
i'll cause a distraction, so sneak away, ok?
why are you crying?
why are you crying, miss?
grandmother!
what am i going to do?
what's the matter?
did someone hit you?
no...
my butt was burning...
sauna's really hot, grandma
how embarassing.
yoon
where are you?
olympic parkway.
olympic parkway?
i'll drive minjoo home and come back.
hey, you're bleeding!
does it sting?
it stings, huh?
oh, minjoo fell and scratched her knee.
you should be careful.
it's ok.
i can take the bus.
you look normal, but how sad.
here.
thank you
let's go, mother.
what would her parents feel?
did you eat?
you didn't eat, did you?
you don't look like you did.
did you like me that much?
even if you like me that much...
all the way from australia...
why would you come all this way?
do you know someone who lives here?
you don't even know anyone and yet you still came for me?
it doesn't seem like we talked to each other that much.
but i'm not someone that anyone would like at first sight.
in anycase, thank you for liking a girl like me.
we don't have much food, but do you want to eat at my house?
let's go.
i can't give you my heart, but i can give you food.
sorry...
let's go...
this is yoon's house and our house is over here.
hey, but our house is this way...
hey, not there!
this isn't our house...
we'll be in trouble if the lady comes out.
hurry, let's leave...
she probably has her reasons...
who can abandon their own flesh and blood?
things can happen, right?
people live in poverty,
but i hope she's living well!
your eyes take after your mother's...
and you're all very smart!
i'll make a lot of money, and go back to korea.
meet my poor mother, buy her pretty clothes, some kalbi meat, and a gorgeous house.
just wait, mom!
i'll go there and place you in riches.
just wait five years!
oh, how sad...
ma'am
oh, eunchae, you're here?
you were home?
stella is so tragic.
stella?
stella from 'last concert?
have you never watched it?
stella is a sad girl who comes out in the movie,
she has leukemia and, later, dies in front of her lover.
how can her life be like that?
who mother dies...
her father has an affair and flees with his lover...
and then to abandone richard who she loved.
how hard it must be not to die...
take it easy, ma'am.
it's just a movie.
it's just a movie, but my heart's aching!
i've watched it five times and everytime my heart hurts.
son, my son!
don't you want to cheer me up?
go shopping with me.
it's not yoon...
who is that man?
someone i sort of know...
he came into the wrong house.
what's with him?
why is that man crying?
i did something wrong.
he must be hurt because of me.
but why did he look at me that way?
i'm sorry
even though i appreciate it,
i already have someone i like...
there's no room for you...
eat this!
hey, galchi, eat.
i told you i'm not speaking with you anymore!
i'm sorry...
talk with me, hmm?
going off stealing things mom, i'm so embarrassed to death because of you.
it's so annoying!
i won't do it again.
i won't.
you always say that!
are you stupid?
didn't you know your mom was stupid?
if she doesn't know, you can just keep telling her.
you can teach her!
hold your spoon!
you know i'm a gangster, right?
do you want to get hit or do you want to eat?
eat!
drink water...
drink it!
even though your mom lives her life like that
even though she's an idiot,
she doesn't throw away her children.
it's me...
danny...
how are you?
is korea good?
yeah, thanks to you.
i checked into a really nice hotel with the money you gave me.
you're right.
it's a lot of money...
enough to last me a lifetime.
thank you.
why aren't you speaking in korean?
is there something wrong?
i call because i wanted to ask you something.
how long did the doctor say i have to live?
i heard that i was dying but i didn't find out how much time i have left...
do i have at least...
a year?
not even...
a year?
son, my son!
won't you come and cheer me up?
who is that man?
it's your first time seeing me dance, huh?
how was it?
the pd says it's corny.
you think it's corny too?
it's corny?
i'm not broadcasting ...i'm going home.
hey, what's wrong?
is it really corny?
did i say that?
yes.
when?
right now!
it's not that really cool.
it kills!
you really said it was corny.
i didn't!
is it really good?
yes.
when other people say something, you act as if nothing happened but when i say something..
you act as if your life has ended.
am i the only one to be pick on?
am i some kind of passing dog?
not a dog, but a god.
you're my god.
did you not know that?
if you like it, it's good no matter.
if you don't like it, i break down.
i am to die for, right?
how did you get here?
i have a shooting close by here.
it's a short break and i heard yoon's song.
i wanted to see him.
you should have called.
where are you shooting?
close by here.
when are you singing?
in a little while.
when i think of my mother,
i'm grateful and i start to cry.
for giving birth to me, and raising me up so well.
i love you.
why are you here?
to see yoon.
let's go.
but there still time till the shooting.
let go.
why are you doing this?
stand right there, jo yongho!
let go of her hand.
go back and do your dance.
you can't let go?
minjoo is my girl.
let go of her hand.
you starting a fight?
i told you to let go.
fine.
let's end it today.
say it now.
me or chae yoon?
can you both let go of my wrists?
on tomorrow's sports news page, it's going to be our headline.
my dad is going to explode again.
didn't you break up with him?
i did.
i did but i don't think he can.
you, do you want to see me die today?
are you two debating?
always saying you're going to die.
its getting so old.
do you guys die because of a woman?
do you die because of a person?
how tedious.
i should stop playing with kids.
i'm sorry but i don't believe in love.
especially guys like you who always talk about love?
i don't believe in it more.
you said that if i died, you'd come along with me.
chaeyoon didn't you say you loved me more than yourself?
is that true?
would that really be true?
would a love like that..
exist really?
yoon can't swim!
he can't swim!
what about minjoo?
don't worry.
she's fine.
stay still!
would you like to wait a bit?
i'll bring yoon's clothes, wanna wear that?
wait!
you'll catch cold like that.
you don't listen!
mister!
wake up!
what'd you do all that time not knowing how to swim .
it seem like you like that girl.
you must been embarrassed a bit.
are you the person who saved us?
maybe...
thanks, bro.
you don't have a brother, right?
yes.
want me to be your brother?
want to be my little brother?
we'll see.
don't want it?
then don't do it.
brother....
i'll do it.
english translations by purpletiger86 subtitles by zdoon
__file_terminal__
sis!
what's the problem?
what's wrong that is making your face fired up?
did you fart in front of yoon?
hurry up and stop farting!
i need to pee too!
go to yoon's.
what is it?
what should i do, minchae?
are you constipated too?
there is a guy who came from australia to see me.
i met him when i followed yoon to shoot his cf.
i got helped a lot.
you have a boyfriend?
not me, just that person.
not you, him?
yeah.
it seems he's fallen for me.
i feel so sorry, what i should i do?
he's fallen for you...so you're saying he's come all the way from australia for you.
did you sleep with him?
did you?
yes.
i was freezing to death so we held each other.
i think that's when he started to fall for me.
you must be crazy!
that's what i'm sayin.
how could you?
the world's gonna end.
no.
it's not that.
oh, how disgusting.
for how long have you guys been in here?
sookchae, aren't you done?
eunchae, minchae...aren't you done washing up?
we are done.
we'll be out soon.
then come out.
your father has to use the bathroom too!
mom!
what?
eunchae said she slept with a guy.
we must prepare a gift.
no!
we did sleep but not in that way!
i haven't even kissed with a guy.
now i'm seeing things.
i feel so sorry.
eunchae!
going somewhere?
to see my brother.
brother?
oh good...eat this.
what is this?
mountain ginseng.
added some honey on the mountain ginseng or something like that.
eat it.
how can i eat this fragile thing?
because it is, you should eat it.
i don't want to.
your mother bought it for you.
hey,
i can't eat this.
how could i?
you eat it.
then i'm throwing it away.
why can't you eat this?
my mouth is my mouth.
is your mouth dirty then?
yoon...
give it so i can give it to a dog.
hey, ok!
i'll eat it.
ok now?
yes.
my mom says she feels great when feeding me delicious food.
i feel great when i do the same for you.
probably in the past, i might have been your mom or dad.
eat well and grow a lot, ok?
son!
yes?
yoon, put this on and go.
what is that?
this is milk oil.
it's great for dark circles.
who has dark circles?
so we have to prepare for it beforehand.
i feel like dying when i see your handsome face get dirty.
eunchae, so what happened with that guy?
guy?
sure.
eunchae's got a boyfriend.
she has a boyfriend?
eunchae?
who is it?
what does he do?
he must be sensitive.
he was even crying.
eunchae, do a good job.
if you make someone else cry,
then your eyes will cry blood.
good luck, eunchae.
congratulations, you wicked girl!
what the heck kind of guy is he?
eunchae has no sense for understanding guys.
why am i feeling upset?
get in!
water tastes great, doesn't it?
i had a cramp.
i almost died.
you can't reveal your fear to god...
you have to crush it first.
that's the only way you make friends with him
when'd you learn how to swim?
i didn't learn.
you weren't taught?
but i haven't learned either.
then what do i do to become as good as you?
try your best!
then i guess i should come here more often.
but i don't swim!
when i think of my mother,
i feel grateful and i start to cry,
she gave birth to me, and raised me well.
and giving me so much love.
mom, you are my sunshine and idol.
how is it?
it's good.
but this place... it seems...
look over here.
stripes look great on yoon.
this is the fifth, ma'am.
oh yeah?
this style wouldn't work on anyone but yoon, right?
but, ma'am, this please is extremely expensive.
red is great on my son as well.
one second...
having a great son it hard work too, sis.
yes,
yoon?
you can't reach him?
he said he was going to meet up with his "brother".
i don't know what he was talking about.
newspapers?
no, i didn't see them.
what?
kang minjoo's fling with chae yoon
kang minjoo reveals all:
love's a just a game to me, i was only playing
i have to go somewhere.
i'll see you later.
to drive like that?
would your head crack like that?
want a hammer?
today i'm gonna die.
and so will she.
no one better stop me.
come in, eunchae!
door's open!
wait, just one more round...
isn't this too much?
go explain yourself to yoon.
it seems the interview is out...
you wanna die?
you wanna get beat?
you have any idea how much yoon loved you?
yoon, the guy you cheated on.
sorry.
but i can't change who i am.
you know i'm a flirt by nature.
why do you live this way?
is this the way you want to live?
why do you live so recklessly?
want to end your career?
are you a rock head?
are you an idiot?
have you decided to end it all?
you idiot, you dummy, you moron!
you done hitting me?
is that all the power you got?
at least you should break a rib or something.
yoon...
i think i like him.
i think because of that...
maybe because i was really starting to like him...
that's why i did it.
what?
you like yoon, don't you?
i'm a romance scholar.
you think i wouldn't know?
i knew since a long time ago.
who's heard of a friendship between a guy and girl?
what is this girl talking about?
do you really want to be beat today?
still
i wanted to go all the way, but i couldn't because of you.
you have him.
you can have him.
that's right.
you should be beat!
you need a beating to get you back to your senses.
i'm going to beat you to a pulp!
you're dead, kang minjoo!
can't you stop that, eunchae?
what do you think you're doing?
what gives you the right to hit her?
no one lays a finger on her!
yoon!
mind your business from now on.
don't meddle in ours, eunchae.
don't overreact.
you got it?
go out!
didn't you hear me?
get the hell out!
i'm still owe you one.
don't get hit again,
..from me or eunchae.
if someone does this again,
i'm going to kill em.
be it eunchae, or me.
i'll kill them all.
don't do that again.
you'll die too.
and i'll die.
i'm sorry.
i was wrong.
i won't be that way again.
i'm sorry.
poor baby.
are you lost?
don't cry.
don't cry, ok?
i'll find your mother for you.
crying is bad.
santa clause doesn't give presents to children who cry.
so don't cry.
hello?
this is perry's mother, right?
hi, i'm song eunchae...
what's the capitol of australia?
don't you even know the capital of your own country?
canberra.
isn't it sydney?
canberra.
was it changed?
what about our country?
seoul.
so you're not demented.
then ok.
let's go out.
are you embarrassed?
is looking at my face difficult for you?
you're introverted, i see.
i didn't think so.
try some of mine.
this is what couples do when they go out.
it's called being affectionate.
you're ashamed.
you're so cute.
please be quiet.
i'll be asleep for 5 minutes, so please.. be quiet.
are you ok?
hey!
wake up!
get it together!
have some.
it's ok.
you eat it.
eat!
i don't eat eaten food.
but eunchae does.
she has the stomach for that.
am i a stranger?
sorry.
that's my personality.
i don't eat from my mother's leftovers either.
where you going?
bathroom.
do you get home safe, eunchae?
about before...
i was out of line.
you're not upset, are you?
actually, i didn't mean to offend you.
why isn't she saying anything?
hello?
isn't this song eunchae's cell phone?
the owner has fainted.
her dad says he's coming now.
where is over there?
sir, sir!
please wake up.
are you ok?
they won't even budge.
pardon me!
excuse me.
they fainted while kissing.
eunchae!
she's like this when she's drunk.
i can't pull them apart.
what happened?
these two... were drinking and then they kissed and...
get it together!
help me lift her.
what happened?
how did moohyuk and eunchae end up together?
is he someone you know?
yes.
how do you know him?
he's just a guy i like.
what does he do?
i'm not sure either.
yoon!
yes?
what exactly does eunchae like?
chicken, rice...
what doesn't she like?
ghosts, orangutans, hospitals..
why do you ask?
because i'm her father...
yet i don't know a lot about her.
you've spent more time with her than me, right?
yes.
you'll probably know her more than i do.
right?
is eunchae...
is eunchae promiscuous?
what?
let go.
you're so strange.
just leave it.
i'll fold it up later.
what?
did you piss the bed?
minchae, conference time!
what?
what secret is this now?
i'm late for school.
yesterday, who brought me home?
dad did.
mom's having a fit because of you so run like hell when you see her.
you... would you look at my lips...
what about them?
how is it?
does it look they've been kissed?
i'm not sure if it was a dream or not...
it doesn't seem like it was a dream...
look at them.
do they look like they've been kissed?
what do kissed lips look like anyway?
i wouldn't know.
since i never kissed anyone.
what did you do yesterday?
well, exactly....
but you've read a lot of weird books, so wouldn't you know?
i wouldn't know either...
want me to get the magnifying glass?
your lips seem bruised and swollen.
push them out more.
in my estimation, you were kissed.
they say the body remembers what your brain doesn't.
kiss that guy again.
what?
kiss.
you crazy?
whatever.
forget it!
sister!
i'm not liking these dishes.
where might the italian china be?
don't move a step!
who are you?
you're hurt, stay still!
aren't you eunchae's boyfriend?
but why are you here?
where's the medicine?
yoon!
where's the medicine!
son!
yoon is asleep!
where's the medicine!
what's going on?
who is that man?
who?
ah, that's moohyuk.
why is he at our house.
i brought him over last night.
he was too drunk.
i told you not to bring just anyone in!
but he was drunk and we didn't where he lives.
you don't even know where he lives, you don't even know him well.
why bring him here?
are you common man?
you're in show business.
quiet.
he'll hear us.
who do you take after that you can act this way?
since you're my mother, probably after you.
i got to take a leak, i'll be back.
that guy scares me.
tell him to leave, please.
what's scary about him?
he won't eat you.
i'm going to wash, so just stay around.
hey!
then i'll go with you to the bathroom.
were you hurt?
yeah, i was hurt a lot, i'm bleeding.
i can't live. ...
put some medicine on it.
let me borrow this for a while.
am i a joke to you?
if you show up again...
and you're dead!
will she be ok?
she'll be fine.
it was a good thing to stop her bleeding.
buy some kimbop!
buy some dukkbogi!
have you sold a lot?
it's blood!
you should go the hospital.
why... did you tell me?
my mother...
why did you tell me about her?
what would i do about it?
what would i do about it, old man!
do whatever you want.
whatever you want.
all done.
go to the hospital.
my mother...
that lady...
did she wrong you too?
yes.
galchi, let's have dinner together tonight.
let's make jorim.
kang minjoo has avowed her relationship with chae yoon today.
i've worked hard the past 3 years
with her alone
i can give up everything else in the world.
without her,
i don't feel alive.
what are your feelings toward chae yoon?
chae yoon is the nicest and most honest man i know.
i've done him a lot of wrong,
but i'm determined to make it up to him.
i didn't think love was real,
but through yoon, i've come to believe.
he's scary, just tell him to leave.
do whatever you want.
both of them have opened their hearts and the public agrees they match well.
they're rising in popularity.
due to today's conference, the issue is getting hot.
live happily, yoon!
if you hurt him, i won't leave you alone, minjoo!
be happy together!
i've got to go to the studio, i don't think drive you.
it's ok.
that's why i brought my car.
i'll call you.
get home safe.
how can i help you?
hey!
lady.
get out!
lady?
english translations: zdoon, purpletiger86 bellaangel012.
subtitles by zdoon
__file_terminal__
who are you?
can't you recognize your mother and sister?
why are you guys staring at me?
is there something on my face?
there is.
no joking, lots of stuff on your face.
ah alright, alright!
i already made a promise.
today at five, at the seoul hotel first floor coffee shop... a guy...
about 26 yo...
your "date"...
i'm set up for a "marriage interview", mom?
alright alright.
if this date gets cancelled, i'm going to dig a hole and bury myself.
it's not a threat.
mom looked at a coffin a while ago.
i looked at a blackish copper coffin.
give it up, mom.
if eunchae goes on this date then i'll immediately go into seoul university.
well yeah.
if eunchae goes...
then i'll give you this bed, mom.
yah yah...
if she goes on this date ...you be the mother.
i'll go on the date.
with news as good as that, you should have told me sooner.
if that person is wonderful, can i propose to him first, mom?
do you not like me?
it's not that i don't like you.
you're just not my type.
what is your type?
it's hard for me to say...
do you want to draw your type then?
ten minutes haven't even passed.
how can you tell if i'm your type or not?
if you look at me close enough...
i might be your type.
i can tell in one minute.
how do you figure that in a minute, huh?
nonsense.
i can.
it doesn't make sense.
why not?
it doesn't
it does!
tell me the truth.
what exactly don't you like about me?
how can i... .. tell you that?
tell me.
it's alright.
since you're asking...
i really don't like your appearance.
what about my appearance?
take a look in the mirror.
we'll pay the coffee bills separately, okay?
i have to get to the broadcast station fast so i don't think i can take you home.
it's okay.
that's why i brought my car too.
i'll call you.
get home safely.
how can i help you?
hey!
lady!
get out.
lady?
you...
where do you put your eyes when driving?
look here, guy.
lady, my baby is..
...stuck beneath your car.
take your car out now.
didn't you hear me?
i didn't know.
when i was parking, i didn't feel a thing.
i didn't know.
take the car out.
i'm sorry.
i'm really sorry.
i'll pay you.
if this isn't enough, leave me with your number.
you know who i am right?
i'm kang minj...
what is this?
what do you think you're doing?
are you trying to toy with me?
but, you picked the wrong person, man.
i'm kang minjoo!
...
shut your mouth and pull your car out.
leave my site by one minute, lady!
chae yoon!
oh hyung,
where were you?
where are you?
broadcasting station.
wanna come over?
am i officially your manager from today?
yeah, the official work starts from tomorrow.
wait for ten minutes.
i just got in a taxi...
i'll be there soon.
what a sad doggy dog.
i'll wash you up clean.
so you're not crazy.
fine then.
let's date.
do i look like a pushover to you?
you, if you appear before me again...
you'll die then.
why is that sound coming all the way through here.
sangchae, wake up!
there is a picture shoot today, right?
yoon.
son.
wake up and wash and then let's get to the picture shoot.
not waking up?
get up, get up!
go out with your son, why don't you?
disgusting!
i may have given birth to you but you guys are pathetic!
today...
fire!
sonchae!
fire!
stop playing!
are you up?
for a while now.
then why pretend to be asleep?
just because.
i didn't want to open my eyes so i just lazily stayed put.
yoon and his mother
today there going to have a photo shoot.
are you sick?
look at the sweat.
you even have a fever!
i'm a little sick i guess.
do you think you can go?
i mean, what's going on with you?
it's ok.
i'll be fine.
hello doggy dog.
sleep well?
did you sleep well?
yes.
good morning.
wake up yoon.
i can't do a thing to wake him up.
he's still sleeping?
yeah, he went to sleep at dawn.
he said he dreamed of a ghost.
he even came into my room and slept with me.
don't tell minjoo about yoon being this way.
being what way?
like not being able to sleep after a scary dream, like how he's afraid of ghosts at his age.
sure.
i wouldn't tell her.
yoon, wake up!
you have a shoot to go to.
wake up, it's late.
people are waiting for you.
are you going to cancel?
i'm going to cancel.
wake up.
oh, good boy!
i'm not good!
you know about the kong kong ghost right?
the ghost who died falling down from a three story building?
the ghost who walks on its head like... kong kong kong.
the kong kong ghost is searching for the person who pushed her to her death.
pusher's name is chae yoon.
kong kong kong.
just now, it opens the door and enters.
kong kong kong.
it's gotten into the living room...
kong kong kong.
it crawls up the stairs...
has it reached yoon's room?
he's not in here...
kong kong kong.
then after that, it goes back downstairs...
kong kong kong.
finds out that yoon is in his mom's room.
there is something laying down by your side.
sleep well with the kong kong ghost.
i'm off.
why don't you get off of me and go.
get off.
don't want to.
hey, am i your wife?
am i your mother?
it feels gross.
what did you just say?
i'm gross?
yes, you are.
that makes me depressed, eunchae!
really depressed.
i'm not going to the shoot today.
go or don't go.
is she on drugs?
i should emigrate.
go and live away for ten years and come back.
am i really that sick?
concentrate, eunchae!
concentrate.
why did you poke me?
hey, it is you.
why poke me?
i thought i was hallucinating...
and wanted to check...
do you like me too?
no!
they why poke a man standing still?
you do you like me, right?
so that's why you poked me?
no!
your face isn't looking well.
you sick somewhere?
no.
you look sick.
no.
your face is pale.
no!
is no the only thing you can say?
no.
you hate me?
no...
am i a joke to you?
do i look like a pushover?
if you show up even once more ... then you'll really be dead!
hey!
i warned you, didn't i?
that if you showed up again, i'd kill you?
i do what i say.
if i say i'll kill you, i do it.
kill me.
you are crazy, huh?
yeah.
are you schizo?
go.
just go.
go back to your country.
go back to australia.
go, i said go.
i don't like you.
you're seriously not my type.
i don't even like thinking about guys like you, so leave.
leave, please!
what are you doing, eunchae?
who are you to tell my bro to go or not?
sleep well?
you sleep well too, bro?
when'd you get here?
1 hour.
i have a photo shoot with my mom today.
let's leave together when she comes out.
sure.
this man... the new manager is this man?
that's right, why?
are you nuts?
are you crazy?
how can you hire a dude like this?
how can you talk like that?
a dude like him?
he's older than you are.
and...
are you on drugs today?
from this point on, i'm not you're coordinator.
hire someone else.
sorry, sorry, sorry.
we're late because of me, right?
mom, eunchae says she won't be my coordinator from today.
why?
don't know.
she says i should hire someone else.
why, eunchae?
did yoon do something wrong again?
how could he hire anyone else?
except for you, no one can handle yoon.
it's not that.
our yoon...
i'll scorn him later.
lets go right now, we're late.
lets go.
you?
he's my manager since yesterday, mom.
you know moohyuk, right?
it must be 'that day' for eunchae.
she's weird.
she says i'm disgusting.
and a while ago, she swore at moohyuk.
she's random, that girl.
she is a grown-up woman...don't call her girl.
that person, eunchae did you get him to work?
no.
no, ma'am.
isn't he your boyfriend, eunchae?
no, nothing like that.
later... if you ask me who i'd choose between moohyuk and you,
i'd choose moohyuk!
got that!
why?
because moohyuk is cool!
he's not a snob like you.
if anyone talks foul about him again,
i won't leave that person alone, no matter who.
got it?
if i'm a star, i'm a star.
no, dirty and filthy... and disgusting right?
you should at least say something.
yoon.
what?
let's break away with no hard feelings.
it's our last day, so i want to end it nicely.
are you really going to quit?
i am going to quit.
today is my last day.
eunchae, you finish it off.
mother, eunchae is really going to quit today.
son...
if you were to ask me to choose between eunchae and that moohyuk guy or whatever ...i'd pick eunchae all the way.
what is wrong with everyone!
i don't like that guy either.
why?
what don't you like about him?
just because.
i don't like him.
so cut your stubbornness..
but he's a really cool guy.
you don't even know him.
eunchae, whatever happens, i'm going to fire him.
so you stay with yoon, okay?
mister!
psycho!
mister!
this sky isn't that great.
the australian sky is beautiful.
our country's sky is pretty too.
australia's is prettier.
then go back to australia.
if it's that pretty, go to your country and live happily.
that's my dream.
how would it feel to be up there?
would it be much better than here?
would it look cooler watching it from here?
if you're so curious, then why don't you go?
i am going.
in just a while...
i'll be going too.
yes?
...
you're finished?
i'm close by, i'll be there soon.
there eating after the photo shoot.
food food!
aren't you going to eat?
do you have money to buy a plane ticket?
want me to buy it for you?
yoon is going to fire you.
it was decided that way.
i guess it's better this way.
instead of wearing yourself out about it,
it's better to not start something that isn't meant to happen.
so...
i'm not saying that it's happened to me before.
but from my experience...
before we're too close and before emotions get deep... we should just end it quick.
that way, you won't be hurt and it'll be easier to forget me.
this is the only place that's opened.
i'll buy you something nice when we go back to seoul.
well, nothing we can about that.
come sit here.
excuse me!
i'll have galbi soup.
i'll have gong soup.
our place has soondae and soondae soup.
would soondae please you guys?
sure, just give those then.
then... why ask for an order?
i'm stomach...
i'll go to the restroom and come back
where's the restroom?
go straight... and then go straight again... and from there turn around... and go straight and there it is.
where did that lady say it is?
i don't know either.
how can she put her finger in the soup and serve it?
let's just eat it, ma'am.
it's quite good.
it's good.
it's disgusting and dirty.
how can you eat this?
what is that?
that's cow blood, right?
i can't eat this.
just try some.
it's really good.
i lost my appetite.
i can't eat this stuff.
these are for rustics.
you eat all of it.
let's be quiet.
quiet!
kang hui-sook...
kim kungwoo... you two!
oh... the smell!
i don't think i can do this here.
hello?
huh?
what happened to my mother?
don't do it, eunchae.
i'm going to show everything to yoon.
please calm down.
i can't.
you there!
you messed with the wrong person today.
your business is over, lady!
i'm going to tell my son and have this place torn down and a new building built on top of it.
what the heck is she blabbing about.
let go!
yoon!
what happened to your face?
that lady... she poured that hot boiling rice soup on me.
i burned my face.
what did you do mom?
what do you mean what did i do?
i only said i can't eat the food because it's not to my taste.
look at her now...she's trying to pour that hot soup again on me.
as long as i've lived, this is the first time i've dealt with this.
i think i want to die, yoon.
son!
what's wrong, what's wrong?
have you gone insane?
stop!
go up first, ma'am.
why?
what about you?
i need to stop by somewhere.
stop by where?
i have a friend who lives by here.
go up first.
what friend?
what friends of yours don't i know about?
there is one.
i'll see you in seoul, ma'am.
if they were adopted at that time these should be the babies.
can you photo copy one for me?
excuse me?
how may i help you?
i just have some questions to ask.
does a yoon suh-kyung reside here?
yoon suh-kyung?
yes, yoon suh-kyung.
oh that girl.
she lived here for quite a while.. but she moved a few months ago.
moved?
yes.
why are looking for her?
it's nothing.
i beg your pardon.
what's the difference between jjangoo and octopus?
jjangoo and octopus?
what is the difference?
jjangoo is...
well, jjangoo is.
jjangoo can't be dried while octopus can be.
oh, that's true.
you didn't have to go that far.
you overreacted.
that's why we paid them for the damage.
money is not everything.
ah, i know now... why eunchae stayed behind.
why?
the soup place.
she probably went to that lady.
she'd go there...
i'm sure.
ma'am.
have a seat.
i'll clean it for you.
just be seated, ma'am.
turn around.
a while ago it seemed you hurt your back.
i'll put a patch on it.
no, would you rather go to the hospital with me?
i'm tired.
mom, i wanna sleep.
sleep, my son.
were you alarmed?
i'm sorry for that.
it was my fault.
it's ok.
sing a lullaby.
yes, ma'am.
i'm in front of the house.
we will be arriving very soon.
yoon is sleeping.
alright, see you later.
yoon.
wakeup!
son, wake up, we're home.
have fun?
i missed you so much i thought i was going to die.
me too!
have a good time?
you can go home now.
you did a good job.
i'll call you.
let's go in.
is he your new manager?
yeah.
but not after tomorrow.
that won't be necessary.
i want to keep him for now.
as you said, he might be an okay guy.
i'll try to assure eunchae about it.
i'm hungry.
make me something good, son.
did the seoul train leave?
it left.
ma'am!
yes?
where's my wife?
she's in there.
open up!
where is this girl?
lady... get out.
you...
live here?
we've met before, right?
you must be the new guy that moved in downstairs.
the world is quite small, isn't it?
all the better.
that day was crazy.
if it's alright with you, i'd like to buy you a new dog.
what do you think you're doing?
are you toying with me?
but, you got the wrong person, lady.
hey!
how do people like that exist?
sister.
why are you sleeping here?
why the floor and not the bed?
sleep comfortably on the bed.
i told you to sleep on the bed!
mother...
how long do you intend to live this way?
till death...you want to live the rest of you life wrapped up in a small area like that?
now you can live like a proper person...
on a nice bed, wearing nice clothes, eating good food!
me, your brother is giving this life to you.
why are you driving me crazy?
shut up!
quiet!
what did mom do for you that you'd call her?
where's mother?
where is a mother for us?
mother...
shut up!
be quiet, you idiot!
my mother is not an idiot.
mom...
galchi...
did you hit my mother?
galchi, let's go back to our home.
okay.. okay.
let's go home.
let's go home, mom.
who was it?
was it yoon?
why don't you kill me!
dry up my blood and kill me!
friend, whatever...
you went to the soup place, right?
i just know it.
i mean, moohyuk caused the damage, so why did you settle things?
do you have that much strength?
as if...
look at you...
looking all yellow.
i stayed up all night because of you.
you know that?
i do.
what do you know?
i thought it was you.
what?
i knew you were the one taking care of me all night.
what are you talking about?
thank you, yoon.
i'm really really thankful.
if not for you, i...
i would have died.
thank you for saving my life, yoon.
hey, why are you crying all of sudden?
for not knowing your heart, and for getting angry at you...
i'm so sorry, yoon.
for being mean to you... and making you sad...
i'm so sorry.
no
i'm more sorry, actually.
i was wrong, eunchae.
i won't do that again...
me too...
i won't do that again too.
english translations by zdoon purpletiger86 subtitles by zdoon
__file_terminal__
episode 7
translation by bellaangel012 with fixes by saturn
please drop a word of thanks to bellaangel012 and purpletiger86 for all their hardwork
didn't i warn you before?
don't touch me if you don't have any intentions to go all the way
it's been awhile, what are you doing here?
did you eat?
i didn't see anything ok?
i didn't want anything yet, it's good that you're here
let's go
where?
to yoon's
why should i go?
i'll leave
if it's because of the scandal and it's hard for you, i'll disappear from yoon's sight.
so stop playing around and let's go
people can't know it's you
you can breathe right?
taxi...taxi...taxi...
yoonah, yoonah, minjoo is here
you've been ok?
i'm not mad at you
considering how much you put up with a player like me, how can i be mad at you?
i don't have the right
i thought that the person you needed most was eunchai and not me.
it's not jealousy.
it's the truth
not you too!
how can you say that?
she's like a part of my bone
eunchai likes you yoon.
euchai loves you
hey rockhead, let's play with me
yeah, let's go
how do i know the bus number going to maljookuri?
i don't know!
so what am i supposed to do?
what kind of tongue do you have?
do you have half a tongue or something?
[meaning you have no respect?
stop it you old geezer.
stop it!
i'm going to break your cane
mister, give me that cane
i'm sorry, please forgive him...
i'm so sorry
dammit, i can't get hit on the head.
damn old geezer!
i knew this day would come.
i knew you would pay the price.
you only know casual talk and have no respect
you're lucky mister that this is the only punishment you got.
if it were me, i would have shown you no mercy.
none!
how can this man become a human?
thank you
i'm not going to play with you
i am sorry
i don't know
where are you going?
it's very delicious
if you are not sure of the expression, just add 'yo' at the end of the sentence
yo?
sleep well
have a nice night
what's this?
what is this?
you look cool
you look great
how did you learn korean?
from my wife
wife?
are you married?
where is your wife now?
she married...
jason...yo
i'm not doing "yo" anymore!
done
i will carry that for you
i teach one, you learn ten...
you smart man
oh, yoonah?
am i guy ?
what?
how am i a guy ?
are you in your right mind?
what are you talking about?
come here in 1 minute, run if you have to right now?
i'm far from here then come in 30 seconds
it's just over there.
here i'll give you a few apples
rock head!
song eunchai
yoonah...
i love you eunchai till my muscles tremble till my bones pained.
song eunchai
yoonah...
wow...this girl's heart is actually racing!
what are you doing?
this can't be, it can't happen
what are you talking about?
you said you like me, you love me
who said that?
minjoo
that stupid girl, minjoo
this can't be.
does this make sense?
we are family, we're like siblings.
you know that we're close
wake up eunchai!
both of us can never be man and woman, you know?
even if you were butt naked in front of me, it wouldn't make a difference.
don't get yourself confused
just have some patience, i'm going to introduce you to a great guy
it's me hyung.
do you think that you can get something for me at dawn tomorrow?
get some balloons and fill the trunk with it
i have a man,
i mean a fianc?
actually i wanted to introduce you to him.
all four of us should go out for dinner sometime
are you kidding me?
no
then what does he do?
he's just a salary man.
he lives in a really nice apartment in kangnam [a rich part of seoul]
he's rich, kind, handsome, and really sophisticated.
i think that he's my ideal type.
i should have told you earlier.
i'm sorry for the mixup
eunchai
who is it?
that first kiss guy...
yoon's manager
yeah, i left him yesterday without telling him.
he must have searched all over for me
yesterday?
sister...
i met him yesterday and he looks like a wolf he's really someone to be sorry for
so...what are you going to do?
perhaps if i ask him to date again, he would say that i was crazy
like "who are you playing" and i'll probably get hit right?
sister!
i couldn't sleep last night was thinking last night that no matter who i meet, i couldn't meet anyone who likes me so much.
is this because of yoon?
and how he's uncomfortable.
so now that you're just going to grab that "dog guy?
moonyuk-off the streets and be with him.
i understand.
'chae yoon is mine kang min joo?
tsk tsk...
is it that obvious?
when you look at me, is it that obvious that i like him when you see it?
because you're born as a girl, there isn't one girl alive who couldn't love him.
how can you not love a cool guy like that.
but that cant be sister, you can't be with that 'dog guy?
i already kissed him and slept with him
are you living in chosun dynasty?
when i look at him, i think he is just looking at me.
he is shy and awkward and he can't show his best front.
i feel sorry for him huh?
who is she talking about?
yoon's manager.
that old wolf!
you can't !
he's mine!
i saw him first
what is the farthest place from korea?
the hardest place to get to?
is there such a thing?
africa?
he's mine!
africa?
missed call from eunchai
did you do all the stuff i told you to do?
yea....
then come to minjoo's place asap
ok
it's done right?
so if minjoo comes from here to there...
i hope she doesn't get confused.
i'm nervous
how do i look brother?
minjoo has to be touched.
she will be touched
if minjoo accepts my proposal, i will treat you nicely brother
ok
thank you, go on now
oh, yoonah, you're here?
just come up then.
nevermind, i'll be down in 10 minutes
where is this place?
can't you read?
do i look that gullible to you?
even though i'm a playgirl, i'm picky for the time and partner
didn't i say before that if you don' have any intention, don't touch me?
i won't ever look for you again.
just see me, i have a room at seoul hotel.
have a meal together
sorry yoon, i have something urgent to do.
i went somewhere else.
i'll call you later
rockhead
who are you?
...yo...
i'm her sister
why do you have eunchai's phone?
..yo...
she threw her phone away
where did she go?
she said she was going to to some traveling before she went to africa...oppa
africa?
yes, africa...oppa
rockhead!
mister, i asked the boss for you address
i came to say goodbye...
i'm going somewhere far
here, i brought this...
i should have returned it earlier.
thank you.
i will not forget you, please forget me quickly.
find a really nice woman
make me kimchi then go!
my nuna can make really good kimbap but she can't make kimchi...make me kimchia then go
i can't make kimchi.
i'm sorry
well, i can make kakdoogi
you were adopted to australia?
you just found your sister?
yea
your parents, did you find them too?
how bad!
not one kid but two
they must have a reason...such as too poor to buy milk...so you find yourself a rich family and live well and prosper
wait
well, you are nice, you learn korean, you like kimchi, what a good little boy!
isn't that a bit too much?
i'm doing it correctly!
this is a beautiful color
so this is kakdoogi?
ehhh...how did it become like this?
eat one more!
where's eunchai?
miss, where is eunchai?
how am i supposed to know?
she left her phone
how can a mom not know where her daughter is?
au duh lee...
au duh lee
jo mahl bok!
what did you say?
didn't i say never to call me by that name ever again?
you're au duh lee out there but are you au duh lee here too?
i'm au duh lee outside, inside, while i am dead or alive.
i'm auh duh lee
miss
your son wants some breast milk.
give him some
what's wrong with my son?
eunchai is missing.
she told the boss that she was quitting as my coordinator too
what?
is something wrong with eunchai?
i don't know!
she said she's going to africa
africa?
what?
then what about me?
miss...
what about me?
what do you mean what about me?
i didn't want to say this but i heard from minchae that she didn't want to make you uncomfortable
you can minjoo should live happily ever after.
that's why she left
my poor daughter.
i'm sorry you met such parents
i am leaving this house
i can't clean like this...
you do it!
what does eunchai's mom mean?
eunchai must have really loved me.
crazy girl
before you come out of the bathroom, i should leave.
goodbye mister
stop crying mom, it's ok.
if there was a crazy dog after me, i would pee in my pants too.
stop crying.
it's ok
who are you?
i'm the friend of the guy who lives here
oh...uncle
why is your mom crying again?
because she peed in her pants.
because a crazy dog was after her and she was scared
kalchi!
i'm sorry.
i was supposed to say that she peed on herself
mommy, i'm sorry.
i won't do it again
you did well, you did very well.
you're cool
why are you crying?
stop crying!
yoo soo kyung
mister!
you're bad why are you screaming at your sister?
why are you talking so disrespectfully
you...shut up!
no matter how much i teach you, you still can't get yourself together.
bad man!
sister...
i peed in my pants too.
i peed in my pants yesterday.
and not just on the pants but on the blanket too.
sister, do you pee on the blanket?
i don't pee on the blanket
then you're better than me.
there isn't much talk about it but do you know many grown people do it?
it's even in the newspaper, didn't you know?
here, i'll help you.
do you want to wash?
wait...
let's wash together
your hair is nice, you should get a perm, have you gotten a perm before?
did we put lotion on?
i didn't think so.
i was wondering why my skin was stinging.
please give me some lotion
i don't have lotion
you don't have lotion?
you never put on lotion before?
don't go
don't go eunchai
don't go....
i won't burden you...
please don't go
eunchai really like you.
she loves you
that girl...
just kill me already!
yes...
i'm the new coordinator.
i don't know
song eunchai quit
yea...
i'll get the autograph...
i have to go
hi, i am jang su hee
she's the new coordinator
do you like it?
yea...
you look really good with short hair
chae yoon
minjoo ya... you're surprised huh?
you're my partner today?
today's concept is the new year's special.
of course.
i have to be here.
i want to surprise you so i asked it to be a secret wow you're so beautiful wifey and your mom?
she's at the salon.
she'll be here soon
eunchai?
i don't know.
that betrayer.
from now on, don't mention her name again
kalchi, isn't your mom pretty?
yes
you want to wear a nice dress and get marry too huh?
do you like someone?
yup who is it?
tell me
uncle
what do you mean by uncle?
how can you get marry?
he's just uncle
you can't get marry, right sister?
you mean mooh-yuk?
yes
no, i'm going to marry him
no, you can't get married.
why is my mom such a dummy?
no!
i'm going to marry him
minjoo, you did a huge favor.
thank you
are you done yet?
why, why is it so loud?
we're at karaoke with mom, eunchai and grandpa
song!
...sing a song!
you're precious" by yoon
kalchi, national anthem song
mister, are you okay?
can i ask you a favor?
what?
don't go to africa, you could take care of my sister and kalchi later when i am not here
are you going somewhere?
back to australia?
you said that you didn't have anyone back there
why don't you stay here with your family.
your wife is already married
it's cold.
let's go in
i wanted to hug you once
last time i didn't.
i'll hold you now.
is that ok?
are you warm?
you're not sad anymore right?
translation by bellaangel012 with fixes by saturn
and of course timing by cox260
__file_terminal__
get yourself together.
we can never be just a man and a woman, you know.
even if you were butt naked in front of me, it wouldn't make a difference.
don't get yourself confused.
why are you screaming at your sister?
why are you talking disrespectfully?
you, shut up!
no matter how much i teach you, you still cant get yourself together.
bad man!
don't go eunchae.
if min joo accepts my proposal, then i will treat you nicely hyung.
thank you, hyung.
are you warm?
you're not sad anymore, right?
you got a good taste.
the scarf, mom liked it a lot.
i think you succeeded.
if you were trying to seduce me, you did it nicely.
i'm starting to have interest in you.
but, this is the end;
i'm too grown up to be seduced by a playboy like you.
unfortunately, i can finally draw a line between love and passion.
did you get a good sleep, eun chae?
sister!
i'm gonna go make a phone call.
hello.
min che,
big sis!
is mom dad well?
tell them that i'm doing ok so don't worry too much.
yeah,i'm really ok.
is that eun che?
hey, eun che?
give it here!
give it to me!
i'm still talking to her!
listen to mom,
listen to you sis...
hey, eun che,it's mom, have you eaten?
hey, eun che,it's big sis,i shrunk your panty.
come home soon.
big sis, suk che took your cell and made international calls and saw movies,ah..ouch!
don't hit me!
we're going to move out, eun che!
...
we're going to move out even if we have to loan lots of money.
so come home asap.
i'm really doing well mom!
i will get tough as a rock when i return.
so don't worry and take care.
i'm gonna buy a lotto ticket while i'm out for grocery,
watch me,i'll build a house twice as big right across from this one.
if mom didn't get so many botax shots and give up a few line,
we own a building by now.
i hear ya.
what about you?
over-crediting sister's card, dad's card, buying all brand clothing, bags, and shoes...
yet you earn no money,if it wasn't for you, we would be so rich, you idiot
i hear ya.
mrs.!
oppa!
what's going on?
choi star comeing to such crappy place?
give me some food!
i wanted to eat your food!
sure, come sit here,
eun chae,didn't she call you?
just a while ago,
there wasn't any call.
you came to check up on eun chae cause you were worried, didn't you?
check up?
what check up?
anyway that girl must be crazy!
she doesn't even know how scary and violent the world is...
mrs. are you just going to sit there?
shouldn't you report for mia?
don't you know that a girl can break as soon as they go outside?
just like a plate when you throw it!
just eat your food!
what do you care if eun che picks her ear with a street light pole or peel an apple with nail cutter!
i hear ya
rice cake!
buy rice cake!
we have fresh and warm rice cake!
we have warm rice cake!
kim-bab!
buy kim-bab!
we have awesome tasting kim-bab!
don't go
don't go, eun chae
i won't burden you
my sister can really make good kimbap
but she can't make kimchi
hold on, look at me as well.
oh lord,
if you really do exist,
i promise you,
song eun che,
if you let her be beside me for rest of my time,
please, little bit more cheap!
thank you
if you let her comfort me for the time i have left,
if you don't hurt me again,
i'll give up my life right now.
my hatred, my anger,i'll throw them away,
and quietly die,
lord,
i make the promise with you.
damn it,isn't this a dark circle?
...
a-woo, wha do i do?
eun-che!
i got a dark circle!
eun-che,
i don't like this kind of style,
this type of stripe doesn't fit me well, and i hate this style the most!
i'm sorry,i didn't know,i'll go look for other ones,
big sis!
eat slowly, song min-che,i'll buy you another.
big sis, who is this girl?
oh,a sis i know well.
but, i don't think she's well.
she had an accident when she was young,
she's very kind and nice sis.
so, are you staying at her house now?
yeah,
give that here.
oh, hold on,
about $200, don't you think?
you don't even have money?
don't you have a credit card?
...
oh yeah,suk-che-unni took your card.
isn't it really hard to get over yoon oppa?
not really,
i guess it's stupid for me to ask.
but really, i think i'm very much over yoon now.
you don't have to lie to me!
you don't think i know love?
i'm gonna go to bathroom.
ok,want me to come with you?
no, it's ok,
i'm alway with yoon except when i'm asleep,
whether yoon is with me or not,
to my eyes that's all i could see.
i told you, i know how you feel.
but, now i see someone else,
sometimes i still see yoon, but now,
i keep seeing him.
who, who is it?
ah, gal-chi!
huh?
gal-chi?
crap!
i was to meet with gal-chi's teacher, i'll be right back.
take care of that big sister.
gal-chi's teacher?
...are you going to the underwater castle?
yeah,mom..what?
laundry?
...you left it on top of the stove?
i'm outside too...
can't you try suk-che?
...where are you?
ok,i'll go home right now,
hey, gal-chi!
big sis!
sorry,did you wait long?
...
come on...teacher must be waiting.
i don't have to go to school,
are you going to sell kim-bab then?
well,i can help your mom,or your uncle can help,
i'm sure there are other that can help your mom, you don't have to worry.
you can go to school with out a worry.
sis!
i'll be right back after i turn off the stove and go to the bathroom.
don't go anywhere and stay put.
don't go anywhere from here!
yes,
wow,fish,
i'm gonna take a nap, i'm so tired, when are we doing the radio show?
11:30pm
come at 6:30pm then.
i'll see you in a bit,
hey you!
who are you?
who are you and why did you intrude my house?
who are,?
...
oh?
...
that pin,
i bought it for eun-che from italy,
where did you get it?
eun-che gave it to me a while ago,
eun-che,you saw her?
where is eun-che?
eun-che,is she home?
um..no..
where is eun-che?
ice cream
song min-che!
what happened?
where are you now?
we got a problem, big sis!
that unwell girl...
yoon oppa took her away as a hostage just now.
what?
yoon oppa said, eun-che sis have to come get her if you want to find her.
do you like it?
it's alright
did you talk to eun-che?
yes.
don't go
don't go, eun chae
i won't burden you
don't go
wow, pretty...
wow,
so pretty.
min chae
hello.
oh, min-che,why are you standing there like that?
do you need to go to the bathroom?
umm..
i'm just, what u doing?
do you really need to crap?
noo!
i crapped it all out before!
is yoon home yet?
son!
my son,
how was your day?
was it a nice day?
mom,i'm so tired,
why?
what is it?
because of eun-che?
forget it,
i wanna go home,
wow,what a pretty old lady,
what is she?
what the...that's my necklace,it's my necklace,
miss, who are you?
which room did you just came out of?
yoon!
who is this girl?
just someone i know,
don't scare her, mom,i don't think she's normal.
stay here, don't you move.
didn't they say where they would go?
yeah,she said she will come back home soon after getting my mom so go wait at home.
i will come back soon, when eun-che comes tell her to stay put and don't go anywhere.
yes.
i wanna go home
i wanna go back to my home
galchi, galchi
don't cry,don't cry..
why did you have to call the cops?
you could have just asked her nicely,
she kept on denying when i asked!
gal-chi,gal-chi,
where did you hide the rings?
huh?
give the rings back!
i'm serious!
i think she really doesn't know,
why don't you go look for it again?
i've just looked everywhere!
....
you know how much that diamond ring cost?
it's priceless!
yoon, why did you bring someone like that into the house?
i said why did you bring her to cause this, you fool!
this small,shiny sparkling thing, haven't you seen the ring?
think about it,
i wanna go to my home,wanna go back to my home,
i think she's a pro,acting all stupid, did you hide it in your underwear?
or maybe you swallowed it didn't you!
gal-chi,gal-chi,
confess before cops come in and make it more serious,
if you confess now i'll forgive you without pressing charges,
tell me now!
uncle,uncle,
what's the problem?
i've lost a 6-carat diamond ring.
sorry, but could you take your socks off?
don't just frisk her,
i told you she hid it in the underwear, strip search her.
it's not like you have physical evidence.
also that would be violation of civil rights.
thief doesn't have civil rights!
where did you hide it?
seriously, where did you hide it?
huh?
uncle!
told you to listen when i asked nicely,
why didn't you listen to me?
come on,take this off too.
i don't want to,no..don't want to.
gal-chi,.gal-chi
mister...umm..well
where is my sister?
isn't she with you?
she's inside
uncle,
mr. car!
what the?
you know her?
get on my back, big sis,
oh lord,if you really do exist,
i promise to you.
mister
if you have her stay next to me for the time i have left.
song eun chae
let go, let go!
mister
if she will comfort me for the time i have left,
if you don't hurt me anymore.
i can give up my life right now.
i can throw away my hatred, and anger..
i can die quietly,
lord,
i make the promise with you
what the...you!
you were at moo-hyuk's place this whole time?
were you staying with moo-hyuk, this whole time?
are you crazy?
don't yell.
eun-che,
why are you yelling?
why are you yelling at me?
i didn't do anything wrong to you so why are you yelling at me?
and i'm not crazy,
i'm very fine, yoon,.
why are you like that?
seriously,you act like someone else!
you did wrong today,
to suh-kyung unni,
to mr. moon-hyuk, you did them wrong, big time.
that stupid girl was mr. car's older sister?
anyhow she is a thief for sure,
would the ring jumped up to the sky?
or into the ground?
ahh,my blood pressure..
oooo,.my ring, what about my ring?
what do i do?
i found something that's not ring nor a necklace,
what?
what is that?
...bring it here.
what is it, oppa?
bring it here, hurry.
oh, it's nothing big, madam,
what do i do about my ring...my ring...what do i do,
she passed out early so probably doesn't even know they are twins let's assume that they are dead,
you, nurse kim and i,we have to keep it secret till we die...
about today.
they weren't meant to be with their mother,.
ah duh lee's narration at the radio station on ep03
a father's prayer written by by general douglas macarthur
who is that guy?
where is mother?
where is a mother for us?
what are they doing?
i don't know.
where are you going, eun-che?
just out for a walk,and get some air.
my ring, my ring,
mom,don't be sick over such a thing,
it's priceless...priceless...it's very expensive,
i'll go buy you one,i'll go out and buy you one in a bit, ok?
you think you can buy that with money?
let's make some dduk-bok-gi together, eun-che.
let's make some dduk-bok-gi.
move!
let's make some dduk-bok-gi!
didn't you hear me say "move"!
dduk-bok-gi!
dduk-bok-gi, go eat all you want!
damn girl, don't you know your place?
seriously!
did you take some drug?
you did, didn't you?
if i did, i would have killed you by now!
song eun-che!
how old are you?
grow up!
dduk-bok-gi?
how could you eat dduk-bok-gi right now?
there are people who can't sleep nor drink a drop of water because of you,
why is that my fault?
why is everyone blaming me?
why only me!
what a pity, choi yoon, what a shame,seriously,
if you go,i'll,.you!
...if you go..i'll..!
come here!
i'm not a dog that comes and goes when you say so, you bastard.
song eun-che!
does it hurt a lot, mom?
should i go get some medicine?
mom, mom,
galchi
big sis
didn't you go to school?
no...because my mom is really sick,
you mom?
she's sick?
yes..i'm going to get some medicine right now.
still,you should go to school,
where is your uncle?
i don't know,he was gone when i woke up.
big sis..
i'm so sorry,it's all my fault,sorry, big sis,
i didn't steal the ring,i didn't steal it.
i know, i know,sorry..
i'm really sorry,
oh, yoon,i know all about it
i don't think i can get exactly the same one,
but i can probably get a similar one,
yeah, i'm going out right now,
if you get there earlier,just look around for a bit,
i was wondering something,so i wanted to ask you,
what's the difference between passion and love?
was that passion for example?
i love you
it just happened that way,
i love you
why did she hang up suddenly?
did she get on the elevator?
ah,
it's so complicated.
complicated,
my mom, eun-che, all so complicated,
min-joo!
your lover is about to die from this complication...
for real
don't yell
why are you yelling?
why are you yelling at me when i didn't do anything wrong to you.
you did wrong today,
to suh-kyung sis, to mr. moo-hyuk,
you did wrong to them, big time,
she's changed, she's changed for sure..
damn girl
is she dating moo-hyuk hyung?
...
aaa,i don't know,fine..go date..
what a great couple just like the roaches.
what about her liking me before?
stupid, stupid girl.
if she will comfort me for the time i have left,
if you don't hurt me anymore.
i can give up my life right now.
i can die quietly,
i love you
it just happened that way
galchi, shhhhh!
....she's sleeping,
the temperature has decreased quite a bit now,
did you finish solving the math problem i gave you?
can i correct them now?
why is it so complicated?
you can't solve it, sis?
no,.that's not what i meant, are you sure this is elementary school level math?
yes.
empty your mind.
stop thinking about that guy in your head and concentrate only on the ball.
hey, listen!
i'm not "hey", i'm park hyun-woo
mr. park hyun-woo!
don't move your wrist or your arm.
move your shoulder!
don't look at the ball flying when you hit it.
keep looking at the ground!
i'm sorry, mister
get in
min-joo, open the door!
who is the bastard next to you?
the bastard sitting next to you, who is he!
min joo
open the door!
open it right now!
min-joo!
open the door min-joo, please!
uncle
eun-chae,i don't want to live anymore, yoon
translations by bluface
flashback translations by zdoon, purpletiger89, bellangel012
timing by jaycee05
__file_terminal__
500 nations
hello, i'm kevin costner.
welcome back to 500 nations.
the first encounters between europeans and indian people are some of the most famous and important events in world history.
most of us can recite the names of christopher columbus' ships the year he first landed in the new world and how he mistakenly called the people he encountered there "indians.
but few of us know the names of the people who greeted columbus or much about the lives they led.
how did they greet the strangers?
were they treated like gods?
were they feared?
were they attacked?
or were they treated as a new and exotic trading partner by a people who had a long history of dealing with other seafaring cultures?
the first meeting between european and american worlds would bring two very different cultures into conflict.
we take you now to the caribbean where the rough road of contact begins.
500 nations continues with "a clash of cultures.
the caribbean
how much damage, how many calamities, disruptions and devastations of kingdoms have there been?
how many souls have perished in the indies over the years, and how unjustly?
how many unforgivable sins have been committed?
bartolomé de las casas.
in december of 1492, three ships under the command of christopher columbus approached the second largest island in the caribbean.
for eight weeks, columbus had traveled from the bahamas to cuba finally reaching the site of modern-day haiti and the dominican republic the island he would name "hispaniola.
the island was then populated by people known as the taino.
one region was controlled by the paramount chief, guacanagari.
on christmas eve, while coasting along the shore columbus' flagship, the santa maría, ran aground.
when guacanagari learned the news he sent all his people from the town with many large canoes to unload everything from the ship.
so great was the care and diligence which that king exercised and he himself was as diligent unloading the ship as in guarding what was taken to land in order that everything would be well cared for.
grateful for the island leader's help columbus accepted his invitation to come ashore.
the admiral left to dine on shore and arrived at the time when five kings had come all subject to the one who is called guacanagari.
guacanagari came to receive the admiral as soon as he had reached land and took him by the arm.
columbus was immediately struck by the beauty of taino life.
the king observes a very wonderful estate in such a dignified manner that it is a pleasure to see.
neither better people nor land can there be.
the houses and the villages are so pretty.
they love their neighbors as themselves and they have the sweetest speech in the world.
and they're gentle, and they're always laughing.
christopher columbus.
as a token of gratitude for the rescue of his men and supplies columbus presented guacanagari with a red cape a prestigious item among the taino elite.
in return, guacanagari gave columbus a golden tiara he wore on his head.
to guacanagari, it was a fair exchange a gesture of mutual respect and recognition the opening of trade between equals.
to columbus, it was a crown, a symbol of authority.
guacanagari was surrendering his lands and people to spain.
but columbus was not simply looking to rule people.
he saw something much more valuable to his future.
he saw gold.
the prize he could take back to his sponsors in europe.
there was wealth to be had.
and to the europeans of the time wealth belonged to those strong enough to take it.
now i have ordered my men to build a tower and a fort.
not that i believe it to be necessary for it is obvious that with these men that i bring i could subdue all of this island since the people are naked and without arms.
but it is right that this tower be made so that with love and fear, they will obey.
leaving behind a contingent of men in a fort built from the timbers of the santa maría columbus set sail for europe.
with him he would carry the news of a new world gold, and docile island natives.
guacanagari and the taino had no way of knowing what was about to happen to their ancient way of life.
the taino's ancestors were part of a series of migrations of south american indian people dating back over 2000 years.
they farmed the land and harvested the wealth of the sea.
taino traders traveled in huge ocean-going canoes capable of carrying up to 150 men.
boats laden with feathers, gold, wood, pottery beautiful birds, cotton fabric, and food.
island nations were woven together by trade.
trade was the communication system by which nations knew one another and maintained peace.
some trading partners even exchanged their names to create lasting bonds between their communities.
by the time of contact there were well over a million people living in the caribbean.
local community leaders were subject to powerful regional leaders like guacanagari, who controlled trade with large personal fleets and warehouses of commodities.
into this world, columbus returned in november 1493 with a military flotilla of 17 ships.
under his command were armor-clad soldiers mounted cavalry, attack dogs, and guns.
the spanish conquest of the caribbean began.
gold mines were opened, and the taino were enslaved forced to mine the ore.
a spanish priest, bartolomé de las casas who accompanied columbus on his second voyage spoke out against the cruel treatment of the taino people.
it is not possible to recount the hundredth part of what i have seen with my own eyes.
a man had need to have a body of iron to undergo the labor they endure in getting gold out of the mines.
they must delve and search a hundred times over in the inner parts of the mountains till they dig them down from top to bottom.
they must work the very rocks hollow.
bartolomé de las casas.
epidemics and famine swept the island.
yet the spanish continued to demand that the beleaguered taino supply them with both food and labor.
garrisons were strung across the island to fortify the gold fields.
when resistance sprang up, columbus sent out military units to terrorize towns into submission.
they were so relentlessly persecuted and pursued with their wives and children up into the hills, so tired, hungry, and harassed.
and there went with them disease, death, and misery just as if they had been killed in the wars.
they died of hunger and sickness that surrounded them and the fatigue and oppression that followed.
after 1496, no more than a third remained of the multitudes that had been on the island.
taino suffering was so severe that thousands took their own lives rather than submit.
wherefore many went to the woods and there hung themselves after having killed their children saying it was far better to die than to live so miserably.
some threw themselves from the high cliffs down precipices.
others jumped into the sea, and others starved themselves to death.
benzoni, soldier for spain.
some escaped into the mountains including guacanagari, the paramount chief who had befriended columbus.
he soon died, a homeless wanderer.
by 1503, 11 years after columbus' first voyage only a few pockets of resistance remained.
in the mountainous region of xaragua taino people, ruled by a woman named anacaona successfully evaded spanish demands for labor.
determined to break the resistance the spanish governor requested a diplomatic meeting.
anacaona agreed and summoned 80 regional subchiefs to her statehouse for the meeting.
when the 80 leaders were gathered inside the governor gave a signal, and the thatched statehouse was set on fire.
soldiers lined up outside with swords.
taino leaders who did not burn were killed as they fled the blaze.
anacaona was spared only to be later executed by hanging.
in the aftermath of the bloody carnage a little boy stood among the ashes and smoke beside the charred remains of his father a boy whose name the spanish would come to remember well.
enrique.
enrique's rebellion
the child who witnessed the murder of his father and the other taino leaders in xaragua was taken away from the killing field by a spanish priest.
he was placed in the care of missionaries and baptized "enrique.
although raised by spaniards, he never forgot his own identity:
heir to the chiefdom of the bahoruco region of the island.
enrique was a tall and graceful man with a well-proportioned body.
his face was neither handsome nor ugly but that of a serious and stern man.
he married a native a woman of excellent and noble lineage named dona lucia.
bartolomé de las casas.
the spanish government created a labor-grant system under which individual spanish landholders were given village populations to use as forced labor.
enrique, his wife and his people were turned over to a debauched young spaniard named valenzuela.
they were at his mercy.
the priest, las casas, protested.
in a more just world, enrique would have been the master.
valenzuela viewed enriquillo as a slave and valued him less than manure in the street.
enrique complied with valenzuela's tyrannical demands for which he was rewarded with regular beatings and robbed of his last remaining possessions.
his many appeals to spanish authorities fell on deaf ears.
when valenzuela raped his wife, enrique reached his breaking point.
he and his followers escaped to their homelands in the lofty bahoruco mountains.
the spanish came to call him 'the rebel enrique' and those who followed him were termed rebels and insurgents.
although, in truth, they were not rebelling, but only fleeing from their cruel enemies who were misusing and destroying them just as a cow or an ox tries to escape from the slaughterhouse.
bartolomé de las casas.
enrique organized his people.
women, children and elderly were sent into caves high in the mountains where they raised chickens and cultivated gardens to feed the resistance army.
scouts were posted on every crag and pass heavy boulders rolled into place above the footpaths.
enrique instructed his men to fight only in self-defense to kill spaniards only in the course of battle and otherwise to simply deprive them of their arms.
at first, the spanish army was confident they would quickly crush the taino resistance.
but enrique's people, armed only with spears iron spikes, fish bones, and bows and arrows fought with fierce determination against the spanish and their sophisticated arms.
time after time, they forced the enemy to retreat.
during one fierce battle, valenzuela himself was captured but even this mortal enemy's life would be spared.
enrique ordered him released.
as word of enrique's victories spread across the island many taino fled to his refuge and joined the fight for freedom.
his legend grew.
it was said that enrique never slept at night.
that he himself patrolled the village until dawn.
for over a decade, he fought spain to a standstill.
finally, unable to defeat the guerrillas on their own territory an exhausted and humiliated spanish government made overtures of peace.
i know the spanish very well, because they killed my father and grandfather and all the people of the kingdom of xaragua and reduced the population of the entire island of espanola.
i have fled to my own land, where neither i nor any of my followers are harming anyone, but are simply defending ourselves against those who came to capture and kill us.
i need not talk to another spaniard.
enrique, taino.
but there was one spaniard to whom enrique would still talk.
the priest, las casas.
after many years spent demanding the king act to stop spanish atrocities in the new world las casas had been officially designated "protector of the indians.
he now sought out enrique in his mountain stronghold.
two months later, las casas and enrique appeared before spanish authorities and negotiated a truce.
fourteen years after it began, the rebellion came to an end.
but only after the spanish agreed to guarantee freedom for enrique's people.
at the base of the cibao mountains enrique settled with his 4000 followers the last members of a culture that had flourished for millennia.
by the end of the century the taino population that las casas had estimated at 2 million was officially reported extinct.
what does the name desoto mean to me?
it means the personification of evil.
gulf coast of florida
in the late spring of 1539, less than 50 years after columbus less than 20 years after the fall of the aztec empire spanish conquistador hernando desoto landed on the west florida coast north of present-day tampa bay.
he rode at the head of a 600-man army, 200 mounted.
they were supported by 100 servants, herds of horses, pack animals, swine and trained attack dogs.
unable to carry the quantity of food needed to support the massive expedition desoto would feed his men and animals on the bounty of the towns they entered.
the invaders came prepared to take their provisions by force.
in july, desoto struck north into the lands of the timucua people chiefdoms of fishermen and farmers scattered across the northern florida peninsula.
one by one, villages were plundered by the marauding army.
indian people were enslaved as burden bearers chained together with iron neck collars in groups of 30.
if they were men of virtue, they would not have left their own country.
they have made highwaymen, adulterers, and murderers of themselves without shame of men or fear of any god.
timucua.
but the timucua were people who also knew of war.
as the spanish army advanced, news reached one leader, uriutina who was secure in a military strength that had never failed him.
as the spanish force neared uriutina's town desoto sent a messenger ahead with a warning to submit or be destroyed.
uriutina responded:
i am king in my land.
i and all of my people have vowed to die a hundred deaths to maintain the freedom of our land.
this is our answer both for the present and forevermore.
desoto entered uriutina's town with his army in battle formation.
but, oddly, they met no resistance.
the chief who had promised such defiance seemed to have completely submitted.
but the surface belied the reality.
while the spaniards gorged upon the town's food stores uriutina secretly summoned fighting men from throughout the region.
then, playing out a military chess game the young chief invited desoto to witness timucua military maneuvers in a large field.
his plan:
to amass his army and launch a surprise attack on the spanish force.
but desoto had been forewarned by a spy.
matching the indian leader move for move he brought his army to the field in battle formation.
to the rear of the timucua force were two lakes to their flanks were forest and in front of them, the spanish army.
suddenly, desoto gave a signal.
uriutina was seized, and the spaniards attacked.
the spanish cavalry thundered forward their horses' hooves driving into the timucuan ranks.
outmatched, the indian force fell back.
some ran towards the shelter of the trees.
hundreds more plunged into the lake nearby swimming out into the deep water to evade their pursuers.
the spaniards fired into the lake, trying to force the timucua to surrender.
indian resistors had to tread water constantly but by nightfall, not a single man had yielded.
a spanish chronicler observed the agonizing struggle:
and now they continued to torment the indians never once letting them set foot on the shore hoping that they would become exhausted by the swimming and as a result, give up the more quickly.
thus, they threatened with death those who would not surrender.
regardless of how much the castilians afflicted them they could not do enough to keep them from showing their spirit and strength.
for even though these men realized that they were without hope of help in the hardships and danger they were experiencing some chose death as a lesser evil.
it was not until late the following morning that 200 survivors surrendered in a body.
they had been swimming 24 hours and it was a great pity to see them emerge from the lagoon half-drowned and swollen and transfixed by the toil, hunger, fatigue and lack of sleep they had suffered.
garcilaso de la vega, spanish chronicler.
the remaining seven were dragged out of the water at knifepoint by desoto's men.
the timucuan prisoners were chained and distributed among the spanish soldiers as slaves.
uriutina was imprisoned inside his own statehouse.
he would make one last act of defiance.
pretending to have passively accepted his defeat he lulled desoto within his reach.
suddenly, he lunged at the spanish leader smashing his face with chained fists.
the chief gave out such a tremendous roar that it could be heard for a quarter of a league around.
the blow was so fierce that desoto was unconscious for more than half an hour and he bled through the eyes, nose, and mouth.
simultaneously, uriutina was gored by 12 swordsmen.
outside, the timucua fell upon their captors fighting with stones, pots of boiling food, anything at hand.
the spaniards turned upon them, killing indiscriminately.
they were valiant and spirited people.
and had they found themselves free, would have done more harm.
with all that, imprisoned as they were they tried to do everything they could.
and for this reason, the spaniards killed each of them not permitting a single one to live which was a great pity.
in a certain way, i feel like the land has a memory of its own and the memory of the suffering can still be felt in the southeastern united states.
you can go into sites where indian villages, and even, we might say, cities, once were and you can see the ruins, you can see the mounds where people were buried and you don't see the people.
and you know immediately there was a great and tragic story there.
so i think that the story still lives.
even if it's not in our history books, it's in the land itself.
desoto's march
having laid waste to the timucua, desoto marched his army north.
in the spring of 1540, he approached a town near present-day columbia, south carolina.
cofitachequi, a farming community with a religious and social heritage reaching back to the ancient mound builders.
the army's approach was monitored by the people of cofitachequi.
they hid what they could of their food stores and sent their elderly chieftess away to a town removed from desoto's path.
when desoto reached the bank of the wateree river the niece of the old chieftess crossed the river to meet him.
relying on diplomacy rather than military force she hoped to persuade the spaniard to spare her people.
the mistress of her town and eight of her ladies embarked in a canoe which had been covered with a great canopy and adorned with ornaments.
it was towed by a second one, which bore six principal indians and many oarsmen.
in this manner, they all crossed the river.
the mistress of cofitachequi came before desoto and, after paying her respects seated herself upon a chair, which her subjects had brought for her.
she alone spoke with the governor.
excellent lord although my possibility does not equal my wishes for goodwill is more worthy than all the treasures of the world which may be offered without it with very sincere and open goodwill i offer you my person, my lands my vassals and this poor service.
unwrapping a great strand of pearls from her neck she presented them to desoto.
struck with admiration, desoto called her the "lady of cofitachequi.
but her generosity and graciousness would not prevent the plunder of her town.
the spaniards feasted on 600 bushels of corn.
they looted the graves and temples for pearls.
then desoto demanded that the old chieftess be summoned from hiding to gain her submission.
finally, a 21-year-old adopted son of the chieftess was pressed into leading the army to her.
the spaniards marched out of town behind the young guide stopping some time later in the forest to eat.
he began to grow morose and to sit contemplatively with his hand on his cheek.
he gave some long and profound sighs.
then, as he sat in the midst of the spaniards he began to remove his arrows one at a time and very slowly.
observing that the castilians were not watching him he struck himself in the gullet in such a way as to inflict a mortal wound, and thus died instantly.
when the indian bearers were asked why the boy had taken his life they explained:
he realized that the act of guiding these people to his mother's present location was unworthy of the love she bore him.
the elderly chieftess remained undiscovered but before resuming his march, desoto took her young niece the lady of cofitachequi, as his hostage.
after days of traveling west, she managed a daring escape even recovering some of the plundered pearls.
desoto would not pursue her.
he moved on, crossing the appalachian mountains.
in july, he traveled down a broad river into the territory of the coosa what is now northern alabama.
the spaniards were amazed by the size and wealth of the coosa nation where a single day's march took them through 12 towns each surrounded by vast fields of crops.
when they reached the coosa capital they were met on the road by 1000 men wearing great feathered headdresses and bearing their young chief on a litter.
after replenishing their supplies desoto and his men departed without serious incident.
with them, they would take stories of coosa wealth that would become legendary in spain.
as the army headed west they left behind one man too sick to travel a decision that would shatter the coosa world.
on october 18th, 1540 desoto arrived at the fortified town of mauvila in the territory of the powerful mobile nation.
the mobile had been preparing for this moment.
inside a strong, defensive wall replete with towers, a war council was in progress.
upon the arrival of the spaniards a man described as a was sent out to confront them.
who are these thieves and vagabonds who keep shouting "come forth, come forth" with as little consideration as if they were talking with some such person as themselves?
no one can endure longer the insolence of these demons, and it is, therefore only right that they die today, torn into pieces for their infamy and that in this way, an end be given to their wickedness and tyranny.
as he finished speaking the captain general was struck down with a spanish sword.
instantly, thousands of mobile fighters spilled out driving back the spaniards, fighting so fiercely they even grabbed the cavaliers' lances by the blades.
the indians fought with so great spirit that they drove us outside again and again.
elvas, spanish chronicler.
but the spanish soldiers broke through the town's fortifications with battle-axes and drove the mobile inside their homes.
desoto ordered the houses set on fire.
wind fanned the flames, engulfing the town in thick smoke while desoto kept the trumpets, fifes and drums blaring.
and yet the mobile battled ever more desperately.
women fought frantically beside the men prompting one spanish soldier to say:
they fought with a desire to die.
finally, at sunset after nine hours of battle, it ended.
eyewitness estimates of the mobile dead ranged up to 11,000.
bodies littered the streets between the charred remains of buildings.
even the spaniards reeled in shock.
one soldier emerged from the silence of the aftermath frozen like a wooden statue until he died.
a mobile fighting man hung himself by his bowstring rather than be left to survive alone.
eighty-two of desoto's men died and every one of his soldiers was wounded, many seriously.
for a month, the army was forced to stop and recover.
then, as the surrounding indian nations watched in horror desoto renewed his march.
but his army had been weakened.
the tide was beginning to turn.
in april of 1541, the invaders reached the mississippi river.
there, desoto heard stories of the powerful natchez nation direct inheritors of the grand mississippian culture.
natchez influence, both economic and military spread in all directions along the mississippi.
their temple pyramids rose majestically along the banks of the rivers.
the natchez paramount chief, quigaltam, was heir to the tradition of the great suns and spiritual head of a powerful religious aristocracy.
his title was "son of the sun.
he was carried on a litter so his feet would never touch the ground.
his head was flattened according to natchez custom and tattoos of black, red and blue designs were etched across his body.
desoto, claiming that he too was a child of the sun summoned the natchez leader to the spanish camp.
quigaltam sent back his reply:
with respect to what desoto said about being the 'son of the sun' let him dry up the great river, and i will believe him.
with respect to the rest i am not accustomed to visit anyone.
on the contrary all of whom i have knowledge visit and serve me and obey me and pay me tribute.
quigaltam, natchez.
desoto would never meet quigaltam or see the wealth of the natchez.
on may 21 st, 1542, he died.
his body was buried in the mississippi.
over the following year desoto's army ventured as far west as texas before returning to the mississippi.
there, they built a flotilla and headed downriver for the gulf of mexico.
en route, they were met by 100 magnificently painted natchez canoes arrayed in battle formation.
seated under canopies, fighting men dressed in vivid colors and wearing large headdress plumes drove the spanish boats out of natchez territory and downriver where one tribe after another picked up the pursuit.
the spaniards reached the gulf of mexico on july 18th, 1543 setting sail for spanish outposts on the mexican coast.
for the american indian nations desoto's expedition mercifully came to an end.
but it would not be the end of desoto's influence on the continent.
twenty years later, another expedition would enter the southeast this time to colonize.
in spain, the agricultural wealth of the region had become legendary but the new arrivals found few people and could barely survive.
in desperation, they traveled north to the land of the coosa where desoto's army had passed through 12 thriving towns on a single day's march.
but instead of the fabled towns they found ruins and temple mounds deserted and overgrown.
and instead of populations of thousands they found only pockets of survivors.
our village had once been very great and populous but other men similar to you destroyed it and forced us to run away in fear.
nanipacana, coosa.
unknown to desoto the sick man he had left with the coosa carried a weapon far more deadly than spanish arms.
while the army carved a path of destruction through the southeast a hidden enemy that would take more indian lives than all the generals and conquistadors combined was secretly traveling among them.
the europeans had tremendous immunity and resistance to the diseases that they had known for tens of thousands of years:
smallpox, even the plague, chickenpox, whooping cough, measles, mumps.
the indians had no epidemic diseases.
none of these were there.
consequently, they had no immunities, absolutely no resistance.
so a disease as simple as mumps that we think of today as a childhood disease it would come into an indian community and quite possibly kill off 20 percent of the village.
then the next year another disease could come through, such as smallpox and kill off 30 percent.
so the indians were tremendously weakened by disease.
knowledge was lost as elders died suddenly.
nations were thrown into upheaval.
in less that 20 years civilizations that had flourished for centuries swirled into oblivion.
our next hour looks to north america's east coast from the arctic to virginia.
there the indian nations would meet another european power the english.
please join us for part four of 500 nations:
invasion of the coast.
feel free to translate this to your language and place your name here as translator.
__file_terminal__
the first world war marked the triumph of the machine over the merely human.
the high explosives, the machine guns, the tanks and planes exposed the fallibility of humanity just as much as the folly of war had done.
when the war ended, people wanted to become more machine-like.
houses became machines for living.
writers became engineers of the human soul.
chorus lines were fine-tuned like precision instruments.
and the rich and famous took on the sheen and style of sleek sports cars.
he makes people look as though their faces are made of aluminium.
you know, they become these sort of super-people, sort of sleek and metallic.
in the age of the machine, photography was seen as a machine-like process, manufacturing objective truths, purged of subjectivity and emotion.
i am a camera with its shutter open, quite passive, recording not thinking.
photography also became an organ of propaganda, exploiting new technologies and techniques to reveal the shape of things to come.
this is the bit that's really fantastic.
you have this amazing fold-out, origami-style.
our dear friend stalin, of course.
but when the high hopes of the machine age collided with the brutal political realities of the day, photographers were confronted with the human cost of the utopias being proposed.
sander's a photographer who makes you pensive, and that's what the nazis couldn't stand about it.
and it was only by drawing on its past that photography would find its future, not as a tool that made humans more machine-like but as a medium that in troubled times documented what it meant to be human.
i sometimes feel that...
that this woman is saying to me that, "there's nothing you can do to help me, there's nothing you can do.
to hold a camera in your hands in the 1920s was to hold the future.
the photographer berenice abbott felt the camera made her "the contemporary being par excellence".
writer james agee called the camera "the central instrument of our time".
hungarian artist lászló moholy-nagy believed the camera offered a new vision that would spark a 20th century renaissance.
anyone who fails to understand photography," he said,
will be one of the illiterates of the future.
the 1920s was perhaps the decade of the most intense debates, as to what photography is for, what is it good at?
what role is it going to play in the art of the future, or even the society of the future?
but what language did photography speak?
and whose interests did it serve?
the future or the past?
the masses or the individual?
society's or its own?
is it a medium that you need to wrestle with and take control of or is it something that is perhaps at its best when art is reined in, leaving the photographer as a sort of functionary, as a sort of operator?
in germany, a nation struggling with the trauma and chaos of defeat, photography offered clarity, rationality and order.
0ne of the surprise bestsellers of 1925 was karl blossfeldt's art forms 0f nature, which revealed in ravishing detail the precision engineering that underpinned the vegetable world.
karl blossfeldt made huge compendious albums of different plant forms and they're as heraldic as if they'd been made in cast iron.
they're quite extraordinary and he ranges them side by side so you can see all the difference in the plant forms and it's a kind of encyclopaedic desire to record the world as a series of typologies using the new shiny commercial papers of the 1920s.
the potential for making systematic and accurate records of places, people and things had been one of photography's trump cards from the outset.
the first typology, anna atkins' catalogue 0f algae, appeared just four years after the medium's invention.
within a decade, photography was being used to record pond life of another kind, the criminal underworld, catalogued by police mug shots.
photographic typologies are still being made, though methods have come on a bit since the 19th century.
photographer donovan wylie spent a year photographing the british army watchtowers that once dominated the hilltops of northern ireland's bandit country in county armagh.
turn around there as much as you can without looking over the border, and then we'll get the roads.
golf 40 is scheduled for imminent demolition, and wylie is off to add it to his collection before it disappears.
the thing about typology is that it's about comparisons.
you only can get to know something if you can compare it against something else.
wylie goes to enormous lengths to document the watchtowers in the same lighting conditions, with the same framing, and from the same point of view... which is where the army helicopter comes in handy.
when you photograph something from an elevated height, it's a direct route to the object.
there's no...
the photographers are removed from it.
all that filter's gone.
and with the towers, i realised that what i needed to do was photograph them systematically at exactly the eye level with which they are at.
so if they're 300 metres up, i need to be 300 metres up looking at them dead straight.
that was a long process, because you have to work with pilots, you have to try and make them understand because they always think you're insane and, you know, "why does it have to be so precise?
a little bit higher, guys, a little bit.
that's super.
typologies discipline photography's unruly tendencies in order to create pure documents, just the facts and nothing else.
bernd and hilla becher have been applying these methods to their chosen subjects for nearly 50 years.
blast furnaces, water towers and the other bizarre creatures of the industrial landscape.
it's like in zoology, you have the shape of a goat but there are different kinds of goats.
and then you are surprised yourself, because you find things that you didn't expect.
for instance, you have a mining tower has the shape of an a, but this a is different every time.
they would be very rigorous in terms of the research they would do.
they would find out where the blast furnaces were, they'd wait for the light to be, you know, clear but without sunshine.
traditionally, in the pictorial sense, people always think, "it's a sunny day, it's a nice day, let's go and take photographs.
but in fact you can see clearer, if you like, without the emotion of shadows and sunlight.
my favourite subject is the blast furnace because that's the craziest creature.
it has no similarities with anything else.
they look like animals, very strange animals, animals that you have never seen before.
maybe they come close to octopuses.
but one of the most intriguing typologies was the human typology created by august sander in germany in the 1920s.
sander was a commercial portrait photographer who had been working since the turn of the century using old-fashioned glass-plate negatives.
but in 1929 he staked his claim as a modernist when he published a selection of his portraits under the all-encompassing title the face 0f the times.
there's a kind of victorian thing going on.
this kind of collector, this obsessive collector, how he took people and fitted them into a frame, rather like, you know, an entomologist would take butterflies and prick them out inside a glass box and then stare at them.
the people were occupying the same amount of space in the frame, pretty much, but you were instantly invited to work on the differences between everybody.
sander's human typology used a system of categorisation based on seven social types.
for example, you have the grouping of the farmers, and then you have the subtitles "the young farmers"...
the farmer's child and mother"...
the farmer's work and life"...
the head farmer"...
and their sport".
for all its apparent rigour, there's an oddball quirkiness to sander's system.
they could well be farm workers who box in their spare time.
i would never have sander written off as the dispassionate observer scientist.
you can't be, you know, when you prick that...
that butterfly with the pin, you know, there's an electric charge there.
and it's just the same as when you press that shutter.
he shows you so much about how these people want to be seen and at the same time so little about what's actually going on inside their minds.
and yet it's full of implications.
it's full of hints.
there is all the way through sander's best work sense of a world that's pregnant with things that cannot be spoken of.
the unspoken that lies behind sander's pictures is the chaotic condition of germany in the 1920s.
the weimar republic was a society in meltdown.
hyperinflation, mass unemployment, political violence on the streets.
all of sander's subjects would have lived with the consequences of that chaos.
let's find the notary.
here is this notary who stands erect, with his dog, in an overcoat.
it seems to me that the overcoat is perhaps the most eloquent thing in the picture, and the reason why is that it would once have been an elegant coat, but it's begun to lose its shape and yet the notary fills it out as if he's an oak tree.
he fills it out as if it hasn't changed in any way, and so to me what this is a photograph of is a man who attempts to preserve his position, at least for the camera, to say to the photographer, to say, to whoever is going to see this picture,
i am no less than i always was which is a person you should respect.
one of the sander photographs i love most is this picture of a woman in her late 20s, perhaps early 30s, and her baby and a little black pomeranian dog, sitting in the grass, and the child sits there hopeful and... and quite trusting,
with his apple there in the hands, and then in the expression on the face of the mother is knowledge of something much more, something that she won't tell us about, something she can't tell us about,
and i sometimes feel, looking at the face of this woman, about whom i know nothing other than...
than this, what she shows me on her face.
i sometimes feel that this woman is saying to me, the viewer,
there's nothing you can do to help me, there's nothing you can do.
help me in what way, you know?
save me from what?
protect me from what?
in the soviet union, the realities were of another kind - the revolutionary realities of a new society.
for the artist alexander rodchenko this was an opportunity to be embraced.
when the bolsheviks came to power, he had declared painting to be dead and had turned instead to photography.
modern, objective, apparently free from the taint of bourgeois subjectivity, photography showed that artists could play their part in the dictatorship of the proletariat.
alexander rodchenko has this revelation about how the camera is the tool of the new man, the new artist.
he invented a kind of special worker's uniform, which he wore, and the camera goes with that desire to become the new intellectual, the new artist, serving a larger political reality, serving the people directly.
but rodchenko wasn't content with traditional approaches to photography.
a new society demanded new ways of seeing.
fortunately, a new means of production had become available, compact, hand-held, lightweight cameras like the legendary leica.
in the soviet union, the still photographers are using the new leica camera, and using it with incomparable freedom, with the freedom that that camera proposed, because it is so light.
and you can use it to photograph upwards, downwards, sideways.
suddenly you're freed from the tripod and you can photograph in any direction, so suddenly social life becomes fluid, as it were, it becomes revolutionary.
rodchenko wrote about the need to reject what he called "bellybutton photography".
he didn't mean photography of bellybuttons but that most sort of amateur cameras are held at waist level with a viewfinder, where you look down, and so the entire world is seen from this view.
the alternative to bellybutton photography was to try to make very apparent that you're photographing the world differently, so that the viewer would be encouraged to take part in a sort of revolution of...
of perception, literally.
radical photographic style was combined with cutting-edge graphics in a magazine called ussr in construction.
designed by rodchenko, it was a showcase of political propaganda, glorifying the achievements of the soviet system.
so this is the famous parachute.
and this is the bit that's really fantastic.
yes, and then you have this amazing fold-out, origami-style piece, but at the bottom, of course, what we're gonna find is, um... our dear friend stalin, of course.
this is not the deluxe edition, this is the ordinary edition, because in the deluxe one this is physically a cloth or a paper parachute that sticks out.
it's even more dramatic than this.
but it's still pretty good.
ussr in construction displays rodchenko's mastery of photomontage, a graphic technique that took its cue from cinema montage.
rodchenko's photomontages treated photographs as raw footage, suppressing their individuality, collectivising their energies, cutting, pasting, retouching and rephotographing them, to conjure up dizzying visions of the future.
but photomontage also shows up photographs for what they really are.
mute documents, whose meaning remains fluid.
there is in photography something quite radically open in terms of the meaning of an image.
meaning is something that usually needs to be pinned down from outside.
this is why photography has grown up with the caption.
this is why it's grown up with photojournalism.
photography can serve, can be put at the disposal of a set of ideas, a political ideology.
its character as a functional record can be harnessed in one way or another.
rodchenko harnessed photography to greatest effect in an issue of ussr in construction devoted to the white sea canal, trumpeted at home and abroad as a triumph of soviet engineering and enlightened soviet penal policies.
the canal would be built by criminals and other social undesirables who'd be rehabilitated through labour.
rodchenko travelled to the canal to take the photographs that would provide the raw material for this masterpiece of political propaganda.
so if we look at this picture, we can see here in the rodchenko book how the original looked.
rather grey and flat here.
the montage - altogether much more successful as a picture.
and he's able to put in the text, give much more impact for this crowd of workers.
and of course this gets more impact in the way that he's given the contrast and really heightened up the contrast between here and the backdrop.
you can see all these different components have been put together to make the picture.
and although when you look at this you wouldn't think it's particularly a montage, it's only when you see the original and you see how it's changed in its intention and its meaning that you really understand how photomontage this is.
but rodchenko's virtuoso post-production conceals a grim truth.
these determined-looking workers were mostly political prisoners and the white sea canal a 140-mile-long gulag.
and far from being rehabilitated through their labour, 200,000 of them would die as a result of it, a reality that can still be glimpsed in the unsmiling faces of the untouched original.
it's not clear how much rodchenko knew about the realities of the white sea canal, but a snapshot of his daughter varvara, taken around this time, suggests he knew all about the ambiguities of the camera's all-seeing eye.
she is shot from above, and so she's looking up covering her eyes squinting up at the sun, and then looming above her is the dark shadow of her father rodchenko with the camera.
and yet all we see of him is this black shadow that's indistinct, so there's both the mastery of vision and blindness and the same thing with the little girl, that she's covering one eye as if she can't see
and yet she is being seen in such total clarity in the sunlight.
and it just seems to be about the camera itself as this possibility of blindness and insight, of amplified human vision and always the inability to see.
while rodchenko struggled to photograph a new society, in paris another photographer was attempting to preserve one about to disappear.
eugène atget had spent 30 years documenting the city's ancient core from backstreet to shop front before it was swept away by redevelopment.
by the 1920s, when he was in his 60s,
atget had assembled a unique typology of old paris consisting of more than 10,000 images.
this picture is probably one of my favourite pictures of atget, because of the construction of the image, very... almost geometric, almost abstract, and there are a few very small, little persons in the windows.
and... but he took the picture, one of the reasons is because this place was going to be destroyed.
and it's not often that he writes things like that on the back of his pictures.
but here it is written, "va disparaitre".
it's going to disappear.
like august sander, atget was a creature of the 19th century.
his equipment and techniques, already old-fashioned when he began, had become positively archaic by the 1920s.
alexander rodchenko would not have been impressed.
he was still making albumen prints which you could print out in the sunshine, not in a darkroom.
you know, albumen prints came in in 1851 and he was still using them in the 1920s.
i mean, this is absurd.
various people did try to get atget to use modern materials, because they said "it will last better", and he said, "i don't know how to do that.
he may have been behind the times but atget was still a commercial photographer.
0utside his studio in montparnasse, a sign offered documents for artists, reference material for illustrations and cartoons.
but however modest their intended purpose,
atget's documents achieved something far greater.
un homme de travail, the maker of documents, was an accurate description of the thing he did.
he produced a document.
a photograph is a document.
it's the first gathering of bits of data on a plane that everybody could look at and see the same objects in.
but atget's documents were much more personal.
atget to me is our mozart.
he is the single greatest artist of photography.
that's a clear definition for me.
he stands head and shoulders above everybody else.
atget is the photographer's photographer.
getting to the bottom of one of his pictures takes time and a bit of juggling.
i decided once to sit with it and really look at it because i wanted to know why he made this picture.
and as i looked at it, i did that thing that i often do with atget, which is to turn it upside down, and when i turned it upside down, i suddenly saw this white strip.
it's probably a chimney flue that had been torn down and the chimney flue was joined with the building backing it and they've now cemented it up and it's fresh.
and on this street, this uninteresting, ordinary street,
atget found that comment of this white zipper...
zip!
...running right up the middle of the building, and he makes his picture based on this little piece of flimsy marking, and he's betting that the interested looker will really see that thing and go travelling through the picture,
past the tree, around the lamppost, across the street, and take his eye right up to that building and say... ... "that's delicious.
as he works during his long career, he notices these things going on.
dusk, and early-morning light, and mist, and sunlight crashing in from unexpected places.
but it's only towards the end that he gives himself up to these accidents or these undocumentary possibilities of photography.
so he does become much more of a poet then.
you know, he's constantly photographing things that are not sort of ordinary documentary photography.
you know, there's a huge tree right in front of the... the nominal subject, like notre dame cathedral.
it's really a huge tree and bits of notre dame cathedral behind, and the tree is very black and the cathedral is very sort of pale and grey.
so you could read it as the power of nature against this great efflorescence of architecture.
they still are documents but they're documents of a different range of reality.
but while atget cautiously explored the borderline between one kind of reality and another, a photographer with a studio on the same street in montparnasse was already pushing deep into the territory of the unreal.
for man ray, the camera was not a machine for making documents but an instrument for exploring dreams, desires and the medium's unconscious mind.
he was such a natural maverick in the photographic medium that he almost effortlessly discovered all these ways to be a photographer that no one had thought of before.
and they were so perfectly in tune with the moment of dadaism and surrealism, all these things like making photographs in the darkroom just by sprinkling, scattering interesting objects on photographic paper and then just switching the light on very briefly,
to allow the image... these objects to imprint themselves on the paper, and then just developing it out, no camera involved.
he discovers this solarisation process, inadvertently, in the late 1920s, and he makes people look as though their faces are made of aluminium.
they become sort of...
as sort of sleek and metallic as those mascots on the front of rather swish, fast cars.
they become these super-people, also slightly inhuman, slightly robotic.
man ray got in on the ground floor of the surrealist enterprise thanks to his friendship with the artist marcel duchamp and an early encounter with one of his most seminal works.
duchamp had left dust to gather on a sheet of glass, on which he'd drawn various lines in lead, and this was a stage, one of the very many stages in the production of what became duchamp's famous work,
his magnum opus, the large glass.
man ray had been asked to make some photographs of paintings, so duchamp said, "why don't you practise on this sheet of glass?
man ray was using quite slow film on a large-plate camera.
very small aperture.
they open the shutter, go for lunch, come back, close the shutter.
man ray processes the film that night and he says the negative was perfect.
dust breeding delights in photography's infinite capacity for ambiguity and mocks its obligations as a sober recorder of reality.
we're not quite sure from where it's been taken.
there's no sense of scale, no reference to anything that we'd really be familiar with.
we're up, perhaps, above clouds, we're looking at some bleak terrain, but it's being offered to us as something between an art work and a document.
if it's an art work, it's haunted by the idea of the document.
if it's a document, it's haunted by the idea of the art work.
in 1926, the surrealist and the maker of documents met, an encounter between photography's past and present, which would have a profound influence on its future.
man ray is the person who discovers eugène atget.
they lived in the same street so he didn't have far to go to find this old man, who was then in his late 60s.
man ray bought about 50 of atget's photographs and sparked something of a fashion for atget's work in avant-garde circles in paris.
the surrealists were interested in the idea of found objects.
a found object was something that you would come across, any sort of everyday object, whether it was mysterious or very familiar, and taken out of context, found out of context, it would somehow appear very strange
and could disrupt your...
your mental state or your psychic state, and thereby sort of project you into another consciousness or another understanding.
old photographs were terrific found objects for the surrealists, full of people and things that nobody knew about, nobody knew what they were or who... who they were.
atget himself, with his archaic equipment and techniques, was a kind of living, breathing found object, which is how berenice abbott, a young american photographer, and one of man ray's many assistants, pictured him when she took his portrait in 1927.
he came, unusually elegant... ... compared to what she was used to seeing, and he had a big coat and so there is one portrait when he's standing, one when he's seated in front of her, and then one in profile.
this one is the one in profile, and that's the one she preferred.
i think that in a way she liked it because he looked like an old man, and for me that's part of the myth that she has built a little bit, that atget was a...
you know, an old poor photographer, selling his pictures for nothing.
i guess part of the greatness of atget is his utility to all kinds of photographers.
he's capable of recognising the great broth of details that the world offers at any given moment, the hard fact of it, and yet the elusive nature of details.
the elusive lends itself towards the surrealists, and the factuality lends itself towards those who are, you know, deeply connected to all the minutiae of life.
the world's least likely surrealist died a few months after his discovery.
by then his documents had been appropriated by europe's avant-garde.
in 1929, they were shown alongside works by man ray and others at the influential film and photo show held in stuttgart.
'29 was a phenomenal year for photography.
you had the famous film and photo exhibition.
which i'll show you the catalogue for.
so it was really like a defining moment.
the statement, really, about where photography had gone.
who have we got in there?
well, there's bayer,
man ray from paris,
hannah höch,
edward weston,
atget,
lissitzky,
moholy-nagy,
piet zwart, a designer, and in fact even the british cecil beaton gets a look-in.
interestingly, we are virtually excluded, because britain was quite asleep, during the '20s, if you like, photographically.
the action was in germany and russia.
but in russia and germany, the action was about to take a sinister turn.
stalin's great terror, unleashed in 1934, had created a legion of the damned... heroes of the soviet union now declared enemies of the people.
first they were liquidated, then removed from history.
propaganda publications had to be kept up to date, as arrest followed arrest.
alexander rodchenko, the master of montage, who could turn gulag slaves into rehabilitated workers, was now forced to doctor books that he himself had created, using black ink to turn apparatchiks into un-people.
these were the photographs that rodchenko had been commissioned to make and the book that he'd been commissioned to make, and that he had been forced, either actively or passively, to... to destroy.
it becomes a diary of repainting, of obliteration, of destroying your work by adding to it.
the interesting thing is that you naturally concentrate on the kind of face area, but then, actually, if you look at the kind of shoulders and the position of the body, the unobliterated area, which is the clothes and the shoulders, and parts of the body,
you know, still seem to proclaim the human being underneath the obliteration.
in germany, humanity was facing obliteration of another kind.
august sander, who could give a black circus performer as much human dignity as a burgomaster, inevitably fell foul of those who were planning a master race.
the nazis had their own idea of what photographic typologies were for, cataloguing racial types, for example.
a government that prized sameness, and prized a certain highly idealised version of what its people ought to be, simply could not stand all of the idiosyncrasy that you see in sander's pictures.
every one of his people is frail, flawed, human, highly imperfect, troubled, worried.
that's not to the world of the master race.
absolutely not.
the nazis banned sander's book and the printing plates were destroyed.
but the further germany descended into its collective madness, the harder sander clung to his typology.
the nazis may have had no place for him in their system but he made a place for them in his.
when the national socialists came to power in 1933, he also felt that it was his duty to document these people too.
he photographed these people with the same clarity as he did anybody else, as he did with the jewish people who came to him.
and the images you see in the books, the persecuted jews, what many people don't realise, they were passport pictures.
people came to sander to get their passport picture done for immigration.
so this is 1938 and this is persecuted man.
and again, the hands tell a lot, don't they?
all his fingernails are bitten, and his hand's all scrunched up.
and then his son.
it takes a while, you know, to decode, to find that this is his son...
his son erich, but there he is.
sander's son erich was a communist.
when he was arrested in 1934,
sander arranged to have his photograph taken in his prison cell.
he died, still a prisoner, ten years later.
sander photographed his death mask.
it appears in the category called the last people.
america in the 1930s was in the grip of its own crises.
walker evans, one of the greatest photographers of the era, used his camera to lay them bare.
this is an image of american identity, of democracy, of all these people, each one, each individual the same size, and therefore each individual having the same importance and everybody's there together.
you can think of it as a positive thing in that way or you could also think of it as a horribly rigid grid-like structure in which each person is isolated in their own little cell and that nothing will ever change.
that's the genius of walker evans, that he's pretending that he's just giving you the facts.
but he's, in fact, by the choice of the facts, influencing how you understand the world.
in an age of utopias, walker evans was a dissident voice.
to hell with the liberals, intellectuals, artists and communists,
he wrote in his diary at this time.
human society is a failure.
according to the writer james agee,
evans' allegiance was "to the cruel radiance of what is".
the straightforwardness of his photographs is deceptive.
it's like the silence of the detective, the silence of the inquisitor, who, by saying less, forces the subject to speak too much until the subject breaks and reveals everything.
as a young man, evans had wanted to be a writer.
like many others, he went to paris to serve his apprenticeship.
he spent his time failing to write while effortlessly absorbing the latest trends in avant-garde photography.
when he returned home he began to photograph in a style straight from the pages of the film and foto catalogue.
but he found his own distinctive voice thanks to an old master.
eugène atget, 5,000 of whose negatives had been brought over to america by berenice abbott.
when he saw this work, evans put aside his hand-held camera and began working, like atget, with an old-fashioned, large-format view camera.
it slowed him down but made him look more closely.
if we try to understand what walker evans took from atget, it would have been an understanding of how the object, the things people make, how those things are immensely evocative of the lives of the people to whom they're... they're attached.
all the way through atget, every tablecloth, every pillow, every pair of shoes, is its owner.
and evans saw this and extended it directly into his own work.
in 1935, evans, along with a number of other leading photographers, was commissioned to produce propaganda images for the farm securities agency set up to ease the effects of the depression in rural america.
since these photographs were taken at the behest of the government in order to support government relief efforts, there's an obvious strategy involved to portray the government in a very positive light.
not only the government.
more important than the government were the recipients of relief.
so the most famous examples occur with the idealisation of the dust bowl refugees, for example, in the photography of dorothea lange, in which, in the six photographs in the series, she proceeds to reduce the size of the family,
which is identified in her captions as seven people, down to three young children, one of whom is an infant, and thereby the family suddenly conforms to middle-class standards on family size.
0ne of evans' classic images shows the gulf that separated him from mainstream fsa photography.
the great documentary portrait by walker evans from the 1930s is the one of allie mae burroughs, a sharecropper's wife, in alabama in 1936, and she's shown against the weatherboarded house that she lived in,
and her face is as weathered as the wood.
you can see that her eyes are screwed up against fairly fierce southern light and it's the same sort of fierceness of the camera lens.
there's no vaseline involved and no muslin.
it's just sheer direct fact.
this was a young woman who's probably had bad teeth so she wouldn't want to smile in a way that would show them.
but the thing that interests me so much about the picture, the picture was taken in 1936, and by then he was an accomplished master at composition,
and yet he was willing to give over part of the authorship of the picture to her, because what she did when he got that close really determines what the picture is.
it's not an easily readable emotion.
it's not an illustration of an idea about who these people were,
it's an actual encounter between one subject in front of the camera who has equal human presence as the person behind the camera.
but though he aspired to the directness of an atget or a sander,
evans' understanding of documentary photography was more complex.
for this sophisticated jazz age intellectual, there was nothing simple about a photographic document.
documentary had come to mean two things.
it... it meant that it was delivering the truth and that it was a social agent, it was gonna make life better for everybody.
of course, evans hated both of these ideas.
and the reason why he kept insisting on calling it documentary style or documentary aesthetic was precisely to make the point that it just looks like the facts, it isn't objective.
when evans photographed the burroughs house, the complexities and contradictions of his documentary style were revealed.
evans didn't simply record what was in front of him.
he rearranged the scene to minimise the squalor, elevating simple objects into iconic symbols of domesticity, and as he worked, the photograph crossed the line from document into art work.
the writer james agee, who was with evans when the picture was taken, provides a sidelight on the artifice behind this seemingly artless image.
i think one of the most stunning quotes in all of agee's work is when he says that the woman of this household told him,
i hate this house so bad,
it seems like there ain't nothing i can do to make it pretty.
and that to me stands in great contrast to evans's work inside that cabin on one day, when he did indeed make things achieve a kind of clarity and simplicity and beauty that he thought best represented american life.
but though evans readily moulded reality to fit his personal vision, he couldn't make that vision conform to the propaganda requirements of the fsa.
in 1937 he was sacked.
by then the high hopes of the 1920s had given way to the low dishonesty of the 1930s, and after that came total war.
and when the killing machines returned, one photographer documented the effects on vulnerable humanity from the no-man's-land of ambiguous truths and elusive facts.
for british photographer bill brandt, coupling close observation with unabashed artifice was second nature.
he'd made his name working within the documentary disciplines of photo magazines like picture post but he'd also walked on photography's wild side, in the paris studio of man ray.
late in life, brandt and man ray were reintroduced to each other.
man ray at some point asked bill brandt what he'd learnt while he worked as his assistant.
and brandt said, "well, not very much while you were actually present
but you went out so much that i used to rifle through your drawers
and i learnt a great deal while you weren't in the studio.
what he did learn from man ray, the surrealist pleasure in quirky juxtaposition, but also in understanding that a picture can be like a sculpture, that it can represent nothing more than the artist's desire to represent something.
i think that there's more directing in these pictures than one imagines.
they're not straight reports, and certainly we know from one or two of them where there are variant images that people who looked like they were asleep in one picture were not asleep a frame later.
so that, clearly, brandt was asking people to participate in a mise en scène, which is for information purposes as well as honestly recording what he found there.
of course, brandt is the great inventor of that strange halfway house between truth and fiction.
bill brandt sees this new kind of social dislocation in surrealist terms.
surrealist episodes unfolding in london during the blackout and the blitz.
suddenly this is a dream city where there is no illumination except the moon.
and suddenly there are all these railway stations packed with people, only they're asleep.
in an age of machines and machine-like ideologies photography had found its own future by reaching back into its 19th century past.
and by preserving the human in inhuman times, photography had apparently proved that it was a humanistic rather than a mechanistic medium... a claim that would be tested in the years that lay immediately ahead.
__file_terminal__
the first world war marked the triumph of the machine over the merely human.
the high explosives, the machine guns, the tanks and planes exposed the fallibility of humanity just as much as the folly of war had done.
when the war ended, people wanted to become more machine-like.
houses became machines for living.
writers became engineers of the human soul.
chorus lines were fine-tuned like precision instruments.
and the rich and famous took on the sheen and style of sleek sports cars.
he makes people look as though their faces are made of aluminium.
you know, they become these sort of super-people, sort of sleek and metallic.
in the age of the machine, photography was seen as a machine-like process, manufacturing objective truths, purged of subjectivity and emotion.
i am a camera with its shutter open, quite passive, recording not thinking.
photography also became an organ of propaganda, exploiting new technologies and techniques to reveal the shape of things to come.
this is the bit that's really fantastic.
you have this amazing fold-out, origami-style.
our dear friend stalin, of course.
but when the high hopes of the machine age collided with the brutal political realities of the day, photographers were confronted with the human cost of the utopias being proposed.
sander's a photographer who makes you pensive, and that's what the nazis couldn't stand about it.
and it was only by drawing on its past that photography would find its future, not as a tool that made humans more machine-like but as a medium that in troubled times documented what it meant to be human.
i sometimes feel that...
that this woman is saying to me that, "there's nothing you can do to help me, there's nothing you can do.
to hold a camera in your hands in the 1920s was to hold the future.
the photographer berenice abbott felt the camera made her "the contemporary being par excellence".
writer james agee called the camera "the central instrument of our time".
hungarian artist lászló moholy-nagy believed the camera offered a new vision that would spark a 20th century renaissance.
anyone who fails to understand photography, " he said,
will be one of the illiterates of the future.
the 1920s was perhaps the decade of the most intense debates, as to what photography is for, what is it good at?
what role is it going to play in the art of the future, or even the society of the future?
but what language did photography speak?
and whose interests did it serve?
the future or the past?
the masses or the individual?
society's or its own?
is it a medium that you need to wrestle with and take control of or is it something that is perhaps at its best when art is reined in, leaving the photographer as a sort of functionary, as a sort of operator?
in germany, a nation struggling with the trauma and chaos of defeat, photography offered clarity, rationality and order.
0ne of the surprise bestsellers of 1925 was karl blossfeldt's art forms 0f nature, which revealed in ravishing detail the precision engineering that underpinned the vegetable world.
karl blossfeldt made huge compendious albums of different plant forms and they're as heraldic as if they'd been made in cast iron.
they're quite extraordinary and he ranges them side by side so you can see all the difference in the plant forms and it's a kind of encyclopaedic desire to record the world as a series of typologies using the new shiny commercial papers of the 1920s.
the potential for making systematic and accurate records of places, people and things had been one of photography's trump cards from the outset.
the first typology, anna atkins' catalogue 0f algae, appeared just four years after the medium's invention.
within a decade, photography was being used to record pond life of another kind, the criminal underworld, catalogued by police mug shots.
photographic typologies are still being made, though methods have come on a bit since the 19th century.
photographer donovan wylie spent a year photographing the british army watchtowers that once dominated the hilltops of northern ireland's bandit country in county armagh.
turn around there as much as you can without looking over the border, and then we'll get the roads.
golf 40 is scheduled for imminent demolition, and wylie is off to add it to his collection before it disappears.
the thing about typology is that it's about comparisons.
you only can get to know something if you can compare it against something else.
wylie goes to enormous lengths to document the watchtowers in the same lighting conditions, with the same framing, and from the same point of view... which is where the army helicopter comes in handy.
when you photograph something from an elevated height, it's a direct route to the object.
there's no...
the photographers are removed from it.
all that filter's gone.
and with the towers, i realised that what i needed to do was photograph them systematically at exactly the eye level with which they are at.
so if they're 300 metres up, i need to be 300 metres up looking at them dead straight.
that was a long process, because you have to work with pilots, you have to try and make them understand because they always think you're insane and, you know, "why does it have to be so precise?
a little bit higher, guys, a little bit.
that's super.
typologies discipline photography's unruly tendencies in order to create pure documents, just the facts and nothing else.
bernd and hilla becher have been applying these methods to their chosen subjects for nearly 50 years.
blast furnaces, water towers and the other bizarre creatures of the industrial landscape.
it's like in zoology, you have the shape of a goat but there are different kinds of goats.
and then you are surprised yourself, because you find things that you didn't expect.
for instance, you have a mining tower has the shape of an a, but this a is different every time.
they would be very rigorous in terms of the research they would do.
they would find out where the blast furnaces were, they'd wait for the light to be, you know, clear but without sunshine.
traditionally, in the pictorial sense, people always think, "it's a sunny day, it's a nice day, let's go and take photographs.
but in fact you can see clearer, if you like, without the emotion of shadows and sunlight.
my favourite subject is the blast furnace because that's the craziest creature.
it has no similarities with anything else.
they look like animals, very strange animals, animals that you have never seen before.
maybe they come close to octopuses.
but one of the most intriguing typologies was the human typology created by august sander in germany in the 1920s.
sander was a commercial portrait photographer who had been working since the turn of the century using old-fashioned glass-plate negatives.
but in 1929 he staked his claim as a modernist when he published a selection of his portraits under the all-encompassing title the face 0f the times.
there's a kind of victorian thing going on.
this kind of collector, this obsessive collector, how he took people and fitted them into a frame, rather like, you know, an entomologist would take butterflies and prick them out inside a glass box and then stare at them.
the people were occupying the same amount of space in the frame, pretty much, but you were instantly invited to work on the differences between everybody.
sander's human typology used a system of categorisation based on seven social types.
for example, you have the grouping of the farmers, and then you have the subtitles "the young farmers"...
the farmer's child and mother"...
the farmer's work and life"...
the head farmer"...
and their sport".
for all its apparent rigour, there's an oddball quirkiness to sander's system.
they could well be farm workers who box in their spare time.
i would never have sander written off as the dispassionate observer scientist.
you can't be, you know, when you prick that...
that butterfly with the pin, you know, there's an electric charge there.
and it's just the same as when you press that shutter.
he shows you so much about how these people want to be seen and at the same time so little about what's actually going on inside their minds.
and yet it's full of implications.
it's full of hints.
there is all the way through sander's best work sense of a world that's pregnant with things that cannot be spoken of.
the unspoken that lies behind sander's pictures is the chaotic condition of germany in the 1920s.
the weimar republic was a society in meltdown.
hyperinflation, mass unemployment, political violence on the streets.
all of sander's subjects would have lived with the consequences of that chaos.
let's find the notary.
here is this notary who stands erect, with his dog, in an overcoat.
it seems to me that the overcoat is perhaps the most eloquent thing in the picture, and the reason why is that it would once have been an elegant coat, but it's begun to lose its shape and yet the notary fills it out as if he's an oak tree.
he fills it out as if it hasn't changed in any way, and so to me what this is a photograph of is a man who attempts to preserve his position, at least for the camera, to say to the photographer, to say, to whoever is going to see this picture,
i am no less than i always was which is a person you should respect.
one of the sander photographs i love most is this picture of a woman in her late 20s, perhaps early 30s, and her baby and a little black pomeranian dog, sitting in the grass, and the child sits there hopeful and...and quite trusting,
with his apple there in the hands, and then in the expression on the face of the mother is knowledge of something much more, something that she won't tell us about, something she can't tell us about,
and i sometimes feel, looking at the face of this woman, about whom i know nothing other than...
than this, what she shows me on her face.
i sometimes feel that this woman is saying to me, the viewer,
there's nothing you can do to help me, there's nothing you can do.
help me in what way, you know?
save me from what?
protect me from what?
in the soviet union, the realities were of another kind - the revolutionary realities of a new society.
for the artist alexander rodchenko this was an opportunity to be embraced.
when the bolsheviks came to power, he had declared painting to be dead and had turned instead to photography.
modern, objective, apparently free from the taint of bourgeois subjectivity, photography showed that artists could play their part in the dictatorship of the proletariat.
alexander rodchenko has this revelation about how the camera is the tool of the new man, the new artist.
he invented a kind of special worker's uniform, which he wore, and the camera goes with that desire to become the new intellectual, the new artist, serving a larger political reality, serving the people directly.
but rodchenko wasn't content with traditional approaches to photography.
a new society demanded new ways of seeing.
fortunately, a new means of production had become available, compact, hand-held, lightweight cameras like the legendary leica.
in the soviet union, the still photographers are using the new leica camera, and using it with incomparable freedom, with the freedom that that camera proposed, because it is so light.
and you can use it to photograph upwards, downwards, sideways.
suddenly you're freed from the tripod and you can photograph in any direction, so suddenly social life becomes fluid, as it were, it becomes revolutionary.
rodchenko wrote about the need to reject what he called "bellybutton photography".
he didn't mean photography of bellybuttons but that most sort of amateur cameras are held at waist level with a viewfinder, where you look down, and so the entire world is seen from this view.
the alternative to bellybutton photography was to try to make very apparent that you're photographing the world differently, so that the viewer would be encouraged to take part in a sort of revolution of...
of perception, literally.
radical photographic style was combined with cutting-edge graphics in a magazine called ussr in construction.
designed by rodchenko, it was a showcase of political propaganda, glorifying the achievements of the soviet system.
so this is the famous parachute.
and this is the bit that's really fantastic.
yes, and then you have this amazing fold-out, origami-style piece, but at the bottom, of course, what we're gonna find is, um... our dear friend stalin, of course.
this is not the deluxe edition, this is the ordinary edition, because in the deluxe one this is physically a cloth or a paper parachute that sticks out.
it's even more dramatic than this.
but it's still pretty good.
ussr in construction displays rodchenko's mastery of photomontage, a graphic technique that took its cue from cinema montage.
rodchenko's photomontages treated photographs as raw footage, suppressing their individuality, collectivising their energies, cutting, pasting, retouching and rephotographing them, to conjure up dizzying visions of the future.
but photomontage also shows up photographs for what they really are.
mute documents, whose meaning remains fluid.
there is in photography something quite radically open in terms of the meaning of an image.
meaning is something that usually needs to be pinned down from outside.
this is why photography has grown up with the caption.
this is why it's grown up with photojournalism.
photography can serve, can be put at the disposal of a set of ideas, a political ideology.
its character as a functional record can be harnessed in one way or another.
rodchenko harnessed photography to greatest effect in an issue of ussr in construction devoted to the white sea canal, trumpeted at home and abroad as a triumph of soviet engineering and enlightened soviet penal policies.
the canal would be built by criminals and other social undesirables who'd be rehabilitated through labour.
rodchenko travelled to the canal to take the photographs that would provide the raw material for this masterpiece of political propaganda.
so if we look at this picture, we can see here in the rodchenko book how the original looked.
rather grey and flat here.
the montage - altogether much more successful as a picture.
and he's able to put in the text, give much more impact for this crowd of workers.
and of course this gets more impact in the way that he's given the contrast and really heightened up the contrast between here and the backdrop.
you can see all these different components have been put together to make the picture.
and although when you look at this you wouldn't think it's particularly a montage, it's only when you see the original and you see how it's changed in its intention and its meaning that you really understand how photomontage this is.
but rodchenko's virtuoso post-production conceals a grim truth.
these determined-looking workers were mostly political prisoners and the white sea canal a 140-mile-long gulag.
and far from being rehabilitated through their labour, 200,000 of them would die as a result of it, a reality that can still be glimpsed in the unsmiling faces of the untouched original.
it's not clear how much rodchenko knew about the realities of the white sea canal, but a snapshot of his daughter varvara, taken around this time, suggests he knew all about the ambiguities of the camera's all-seeing eye.
she is shot from above, and so she's looking up covering her eyes squinting up at the sun, and then looming above her is the dark shadow of her father rodchenko with the camera.
and yet all we see of him is this black shadow that's indistinct, so there's both the mastery of vision and blindness and the same thing with the little girl, that she's covering one eye as if she can't see
and yet she is being seen in such total clarity in the sunlight.
and it just seems to be about the camera itself as this possibility of blindness and insight, of amplified human vision and always the inability to see.
while rodchenko struggled to photograph a new society, in paris another photographer was attempting to preserve one about to disappear.
eugène atget had spent 30 years documenting the city's ancient core from backstreet to shop front before it was swept away by redevelopment.
by the 1920s, when he was in his 60s,
atget had assembled a unique typology of old paris consisting of more than 10,000 images.
this picture is probably one of my favourite pictures of atget, because of the construction of the image, very...almost geometric, almost abstract, and there are a few very small, little persons in the windows.
and...but he took the picture, one of the reasons is because this place was going to be destroyed.
and it's not often that he writes things like that on the back of his pictures.
but here it is written, "va disparaitre".
it's going to disappear.
like august sander, atget was a creature of the 19th century.
his equipment and techniques, already old-fashioned when he began, had become positively archaic by the 1920s.
alexander rodchenko would not have been impressed.
he was still making albumen prints which you could print out in the sunshine, not in a darkroom.
you know, albumen prints came in in 1851 and he was still using them in the 1920s.
i mean, this is absurd.
various people did try to get atget to use modern materials, because they said "it will last better", and he said, "i don't know how to do that.
he may have been behind the times but atget was still a commercial photographer.
0utside his studio in montparnasse, a sign offered documents for artists, reference material for illustrations and cartoons.
but however modest their intended purpose,
atget's documents achieved something far greater.
un homme de travail, the maker of documents, was an accurate description of the thing he did.
he produced a document.
a photograph is a document.
it's the first gathering of bits of data on a plane that everybody could look at and see the same objects in.
but atget's documents were much more personal.
atget to me is our mozart.
he is the single greatest artist of photography.
that's a clear definition for me.
he stands head and shoulders above everybody else.
atget is the photographer's photographer.
getting to the bottom of one of his pictures takes time and a bit of juggling.
i decided once to sit with it and really look at it because i wanted to know why he made this picture.
and as i looked at it, i did that thing that i often do with atget, which is to turn it upside down, and when i turned it upside down, i suddenly saw this white strip.
it's probably a chimney flue that had been torn down and the chimney flue was joined with the building backing it and they've now cemented it up and it's fresh.
and on this street, this uninteresting, ordinary street,
atget found that comment of this white zipper...
zip!
..running right up the middle of the building, and he makes his picture based on this little piece of flimsy marking, and he's betting that the interested looker will really see that thing and go travelling through the picture,
past the tree, around the lamppost, across the street, and take his eye right up to that building and say... .."that's delicious.
as he works during his long career, he notices these things going on.
dusk, and early-morning light, and mist, and sunlight crashing in from unexpected places.
but it's only towards the end that he gives himself up to these accidents or these undocumentary possibilities of photography.
so he does become much more of a poet then.
you know, he's constantly photographing things that are not sort of ordinary documentary photography.
you know, there's a huge tree right in front of the...the nominal subject, like notre dame cathedral.
it's really a huge tree and bits of notre dame cathedral behind, and the tree is very black and the cathedral is very sort of pale and grey.
so you could read it as the power of nature against this great efflorescence of architecture.
they still are documents but they're documents of a different range of reality.
but while atget cautiously explored the borderline between one kind of reality and another, a photographer with a studio on the same street in montparnasse was already pushing deep into the territory of the unreal.
for man ray, the camera was not a machine for making documents but an instrument for exploring dreams, desires and the medium's unconscious mind.
he was such a natural maverick in the photographic medium that he almost effortlessly discovered all these ways to be a photographer that no one had thought of before.
and they were so perfectly in tune with the moment of dadaism and surrealism, all these things like making photographs in the darkroom just by sprinkling, scattering interesting objects on photographic paper and then just switching the light on very briefly,
to allow the image...these objects to imprint themselves on the paper, and then just developing it out, no camera involved.
he discovers this solarisation process, inadvertently, in the late 1920s, and he makes people look as though their faces are made of aluminium.
they become sort of...
as sort of sleek and metallic as those mascots on the front of rather swish, fast cars.
they become these super-people, also slightly inhuman, slightly robotic.
man ray got in on the ground floor of the surrealist enterprise thanks to his friendship with the artist marcel duchamp and an early encounter with one of his most seminal works.
duchamp had left dust to gather on a sheet of glass, on which he'd drawn various lines in lead, and this was a stage, one of the very many stages in the production of what became duchamp's famous work,
his magnum opus, the large glass.
man ray had been asked to make some photographs of paintings, so duchamp said, "why don't you practise on this sheet of glass?
man ray was using quite slow film on a large-plate camera.
very small aperture.
they open the shutter, go for lunch, come back, close the shutter.
man ray processes the film that night and he says the negative was perfect.
dust breeding delights in photography's infinite capacity for ambiguity and mocks its obligations as a sober recorder of reality.
we're not quite sure from where it's been taken.
there's no sense of scale, no reference to anything that we'd really be familiar with.
we're up, perhaps, above clouds, we're looking at some bleak terrain, but it's being offered to us as something between an art work and a document.
if it's an art work, it's haunted by the idea of the document.
if it's a document, it's haunted by the idea of the art work.
in 1926, the surrealist and the maker of documents met, an encounter between photography's past and present, which would have a profound influence on its future.
man ray is the person who discovers eugène atget.
they lived in the same street so he didn't have far to go to find this old man, who was then in his late 60s.
man ray bought about 50 of atget's photographs and sparked something of a fashion for atget's work in avant-garde circles in paris.
the surrealists were interested in the idea of found objects.
a found object was something that you would come across, any sort of everyday object, whether it was mysterious or very familiar, and taken out of context, found out of context, it would somehow appear very strange
and could disrupt your...
your mental state or your psychic state, and thereby sort of project you into another consciousness or another understanding.
old photographs were terrific found objects for the surrealists, full of people and things that nobody knew about, nobody knew what they were or who...who they were.
atget himself, with his archaic equipment and techniques, was a kind of living, breathing found object, which is how berenice abbott, a young american photographer, and one of man ray's many assistants, pictured him when she took his portrait in 1927.
he came, unusually elegant... and he had a big coat and so there is one portrait when he's standing, one when he's seated in front of her, and then one in profile.
this one is the one in profile, and that's the one she preferred.
i think that in a way she liked it because he looked like an old man, and for me that's part of the myth that she has built a little bit, that atget was a...
you know, an old poor photographer, selling his pictures for nothing.
i guess part of the greatness of atget is his utility to all kinds of photographers.
he's capable of recognising the great broth of details that the world offers at any given moment, the hard fact of it, and yet the elusive nature of details.
the elusive lends itself towards the surrealists, and the factuality lends itself towards those who are, you know, deeply connected to all the minutiae of life.
the world's least likely surrealist died a few months after his discovery.
by then his documents had been appropriated by europe's avant-garde.
in 1929, they were shown alongside works by man ray and others at the influential film and photo show held in stuttgart.
'29 was a phenomenal year for photography.
you had the famous film and photo exhibition.
which i'll show you the catalogue for.
so it was really like a defining moment.
the statement, really, about where photography had gone.
who have we got in there?
well, there's bayer,
man ray from paris,
hannah höch,
edward weston,
atget,
lissitzky,
moholy-nagy,
piet zwart, a designer, and in fact even the british cecil beaton gets a look-in.
interestingly, we are virtually excluded, because britain was quite asleep, during the '20s, if you like, photographically.
the action was in germany and russia.
but in russia and germany, the action was about to take a sinister turn.
stalin's great terror, unleashed in 1934, had created a legion of the damned... heroes of the soviet union now declared enemies of the people.
first they were liquidated, then removed from history.
propaganda publications had to be kept up to date, as arrest followed arrest.
alexander rodchenko, the master of montage, who could turn gulag slaves into rehabilitated workers, was now forced to doctor books that he himself had created, using black ink to turn apparatchiks into un-people.
these were the photographs that rodchenko had been commissioned to make and the book that he'd been commissioned to make, and that he had been forced, either actively or passively, to...to destroy.
it becomes a diary of repainting, of obliteration, of destroying your work by adding to it.
the interesting thing is that you naturally concentrate on the kind of face area, but then, actually, if you look at the kind of shoulders and the position of the body, the unobliterated area, which is the clothes and the shoulders, and parts of the body,
you know, still seem to proclaim the human being underneath the obliteration.
in germany, humanity was facing obliteration of another kind.
august sander, who could give a black circus performer as much human dignity as a burgomaster, inevitably fell foul of those who were planning a master race.
the nazis had their own idea of what photographic typologies were for, cataloguing racial types, for example.
a government that prized sameness, and prized a certain highly idealised version of what its people ought to be, simply could not stand all of the idiosyncrasy that you see in sander's pictures.
every one of his people is frail, flawed, human, highly imperfect, troubled, worried.
that's not to the world of the master race.
absolutely not.
the nazis banned sander's book and the printing plates were destroyed.
but the further germany descended into its collective madness, the harder sander clung to his typology.
the nazis may have had no place for him in their system but he made a place for them in his.
when the national socialists came to power in 1933, he also felt that it was his duty to document these people too.
he photographed these people with the same clarity as he did anybody else, as he did with the jewish people who came to him.
and the images you see in the books, the persecuted jews, what many people don't realise, they were passport pictures.
people came to sander to get their passport picture done for immigration.
so this is 1938 and this is persecuted man.
and again, the hands tell a lot, don't they?
all his fingernails are bitten, and his hand's all scrunched up.
and then his son.
it takes a while, you know, to decode, to find that this is his son...
his son erich, but there he is.
sander's son erich was a communist.
when he was arrested in 1934,
sander arranged to have his photograph taken in his prison cell.
he died, still a prisoner, ten years later.
sander photographed his death mask.
it appears in the category called the last people.
america in the 1930s was in the grip of its own crises.
walker evans, one of the greatest photographers of the era, used his camera to lay them bare.
this is an image of american identity, of democracy, of all these people, each one, each individual the same size, and therefore each individual having the same importance and everybody's there together.
you can think of it as a positive thing in that way or you could also think of it as a horribly rigid grid-like structure in which each person is isolated in their own little cell and that nothing will ever change.
that's the genius of walker evans, that he's pretending that he's just giving you the facts.
but he's, in fact, by the choice of the facts, influencing how you understand the world.
in an age of utopias, walker evans was a dissident voice.
to hell with the liberals, intellectuals, artists and communists,
he wrote in his diary at this time.
human society is a failure.
according to the writer james agee,
evans' allegiance was "to the cruel radiance of what is".
the straightforwardness of his photographs is deceptive.
it's like the silence of the detective, the silence of the inquisitor, who, by saying less, forces the subject to speak too much until the subject breaks and reveals everything.
as a young man, evans had wanted to be a writer.
like many others, he went to paris to serve his apprenticeship.
he spent his time failing to write while effortlessly absorbing the latest trends in avant-garde photography.
when he returned home he began to photograph in a style straight from the pages of the film and foto catalogue.
but he found his own distinctive voice thanks to an old master.
eugène atget, 5,000 of whose negatives had been brought over to america by berenice abbott.
when he saw this work, evans put aside his hand-held camera and began working, like atget, with an old-fashioned, large-format view camera.
it slowed him down but made him look more closely.
if we try to understand what walker evans took from atget, it would have been an understanding of how the object, the things people make, how those things are immensely evocative of the lives of the people to whom they're...they're attached.
all the way through atget, every tablecloth, every pillow, every pair of shoes, is its owner.
and evans saw this and extended it directly into his own work.
in 1935, evans, along with a number of other leading photographers, was commissioned to produce propaganda images for the farm securities agency set up to ease the effects of the depression in rural america.
since these photographs were taken at the behest of the government in order to support government relief efforts, there's an obvious strategy involved to portray the government in a very positive light.
not only the government.
more important than the government were the recipients of relief.
so the most famous examples occur with the idealisation of the dust bowl refugees, for example, in the photography of dorothea lange, in which, in the six photographs in the series, she proceeds to reduce the size of the family,
which is identified in her captions as seven people, down to three young children, one of whom is an infant, and thereby the family suddenly conforms to middle-class standards on family size.
0ne of evans' classic images shows the gulf that separated him from mainstream fsa photography.
the great documentary portrait by walker evans from the 1930s is the one of allie mae burroughs, a sharecropper's wife, in alabama in 1936, and she's shown against the weatherboarded house that she lived in,
and her face is as weathered as the wood.
you can see that her eyes are screwed up against fairly fierce southern light and it's the same sort of fierceness of the camera lens.
there's no vaseline involved and no muslin.
it's just sheer direct fact.
this was a young woman who's probably had bad teeth so she wouldn't want to smile in a way that would show them.
but the thing that interests me so much about the picture, the picture was taken in 1936, and by then he was an accomplished master at composition,
and yet he was willing to give over part of the authorship of the picture to her, because what she did when he got that close really determines what the picture is.
it's not an easily readable emotion.
it's not an illustration of an idea about who these people were,
it's an actual encounter between one subject in front of the camera who has equal human presence as the person behind the camera.
but though he aspired to the directness of an atget or a sander,
evans' understanding of documentary photography was more complex.
for this sophisticated jazz age intellectual, there was nothing simple about a photographic document.
documentary had come to mean two things.
it...it meant that it was delivering the truth and that it was a social agent, it was gonna make life better for everybody.
of course, evans hated both of these ideas.
and the reason why he kept insisting on calling it documentary style or documentary aesthetic was precisely to make the point that it just looks like the facts, it isn't objective.
when evans photographed the burroughs house, the complexities and contradictions of his documentary style were revealed.
evans didn't simply record what was in front of him.
he rearranged the scene to minimise the squalor, elevating simple objects into iconic symbols of domesticity, and as he worked, the photograph crossed the line from document into art work.
the writer james agee, who was with evans when the picture was taken, provides a sidelight on the artifice behind this seemingly artless image.
i think one of the most stunning quotes in all of agee's work is when he says that the woman of this household told him,
i hate this house so bad,
it seems like there ain't nothing i can do to make it pretty.
and that to me stands in great contrast to evans's work inside that cabin on one day, when he did indeed make things achieve a kind of clarity and simplicity and beauty that he thought best represented american life.
but though evans readily moulded reality to fit his personal vision, he couldn't make that vision conform to the propaganda requirements of the fsa.
in 1937 he was sacked.
by then the high hopes of the 1920s had given way to the low dishonesty of the 1930s, and after that came total war.
and when the killing machines returned, one photographer documented the effects on vulnerable humanity from the no-man's-land of ambiguous truths and elusive facts.
for british photographer bill brandt, coupling close observation with unabashed artifice was second nature.
he'd made his name working within the documentary disciplines of photo magazines like picture post but he'd also walked on photography's wild side, in the paris studio of man ray.
late in life, brandt and man ray were reintroduced to each other.
man ray at some point asked bill brandt what he'd learnt while he worked as his assistant.
and brandt said, "well, not very much while you were actually present
but you went out so much that i used to rifle through your drawers
and i learnt a great deal while you weren't in the studio.
what he did learn from man ray, the surrealist pleasure in quirky juxtaposition, but also in understanding that a picture can be like a sculpture, that it can represent nothing more than the artist's desire to represent something.
i think that there's more directing in these pictures than one imagines.
they're not straight reports, and certainly we know from one or two of them where there are variant images that people who looked like they were asleep in one picture were not asleep a frame later.
so that, clearly, brandt was asking people to participate in a mise en scène, which is for information purposes as well as honestly recording what he found there.
of course, brandt is the great inventor of that strange halfway house between truth and fiction.
bill brandt sees this new kind of social dislocation in surrealist terms.
surrealist episodes unfolding in london during the blackout and the blitz.
suddenly this is a dream city where there is no illumination except the moon.
and suddenly there are all these railway stations packed with people, only they're asleep.
in an age of machines and machine-like ideologies photography had found its own future by reaching back into its 19th century past.
and by preserving the human in inhuman times, photography had apparently proved that it was a humanistic rather than a mechanistic medium... a claim that would be tested in the years that lay immediately ahead.
__file_terminal__
this programme contains some strong language.
two photographers are on the road.
martin parr and john gossage make very different kinds of pictures, but the idea of a photographic journey is at the heart of what they both do.
what's that about?
yellow ribbon.
ah, yellow ribbon.
stop!
what's the significance of the yellow ribbon?
it came out of the iranian hostage situation.
they're on a five-day shoot-out - a photographic exploration of the misissippi delta in memphis, one of the most iconic cities in the american south, but the things that catch their eyes aren't the ones the average tourists would choose.
i'm going to wander around the back.
all right.
see you in 10.
yeah.
'i have a responsibility, as a documentary photographer, 'to photograph the times we live in, what the world is about now.
'particularly, in america, it is about the big chain shop, about the big sort of wal-mart or whatever.
'my job is to try and capture what's going on.
now, if you get a great photo as well, that's a bonus.'
'i look out and say, "i think there's something to be done here.
'it tends to be places where no other photographers i know ever thin there's anything worth doing.'
the american photographer garry winogrand once said that he took photographs to see what the world looked like photographed.
photographers have always had this as their mission statement, but the three decades from the 1950s onwards were the real golden age of photographic journeys.
fuelled by existential restlessness, baby boomer wanderlust and cheap petrol, the photographers set out for new territories to see what these worlds looked like photographed and this is what they discovered.
the desert.
the open road.
the city street.
the beach.
the suburban nowhereville.
the man-altered landscape.
these are the places that photography owns and this is the story of the journeys photographers made to claim them.
photography always wanted to be on the move even before the technology was really up to it.
when timothy o'sullivan penetrated the deserts of the american west in 1867 he brought his dark room with him, pulled by four mules.
around the same time, the bisson brothers employed 25 porters to haul their equipment up the face of mont blanc, processing fragile, glass plate negatives in a dark room tent thousands of feet above sea level.
the technology has come a long way since then, but any photographic journey worth making still demands blood, sweat and tears.
they say that timothy o'sullivan was a master at profanity and i can believe it, the actual physical work of getting out is often fairly arduous, it involves a scramble, it involves risking snakes and swatting at the bugs.
so it is a struggle, but when you get to the top of the ridge, you've got a whole new scene to work with, and it's thrilling.
it's the greatest satisfaction you're gonna have all day.
so, no, it's...it's the view...
stupid.
it's an excuse to be in the world really.
not just looking, that's the crazy part of it, it's being in the world.
this is something i do, i take walks with my camera.
i'm reminded of things i didn't even know i knew, for instance, because some...
i'm engaged in the world.
i have known this field for the last 45 years and there's something about this field that i've always loved.
isn't this wild?
shit!
this is what i was telling you about before.
that's part of why i'm interested in this field, cos i'm gonna photograph nature in all four seasons.
and then these sky divers coming down deus ex macchina, you know?
it's sort of like...
oh, here he comes!
there, he's in the frame now.
the history of photography is made up of journeys great and small, some as epic as a continent, some no longer than a city street...
..but few have been as influential as one taken by robert frank.
it produced a book of photographs that laid bare the soul of 1950s america.
the seminal person absolutely after the war is robert frank.
the americans is one of the most extraordinary paper movies that's ever been made.
born in switzerland to jewish parentage, robert frank brought an outsider's perspective to bear when he embarked on a nine month road trip of his adopted home in 1956.
frank got a guggenheim fellowship to travel around the united states and document the kind of culture that he saw evolving here which he believed was spreading elsewhere.
he started in new york, travelled south to south carolina, then onto texas, to california, then back to chicago, and finally ending up back in new york.
there was a continuity to the way he travelled - it's not the hop, skip and jump of the world travelling cartier-bresson.
he got in a car, he saw the whole thing and he shot every place.
frank's journey produced the photographic equivalent of the great american novel, laying bare the anxieties that the chrome and the advertising jingles obscured.
though he'd been trained in a swiss tradition that aspired to photographic perfectionism,
frank's free-wheeling odyssey echoed the spontaneity of abstract expressionist art and beat poetry.
he doesn't give a damn if the verticals are straight up and down, because he's standing in the middle of the picture he takes off, and jackson pollock stands in the middle of the paintings he makes too.
again it's the kind of zeitgeist of abstract expressionism, that freedom, that release from the conventions of picture making that were earlier is there with frank.
kerouac described it, i think, what he did - he called frank's qualities agility, mystery, sadness, genius and secret strangeness.
i think those really are the qualities that are there everywhere in those images.
at the end of his road trip, frank had nearly 700 rolls of film.
he brought his final selection to the french publisher robert delpire, and they designed a photo book that would become one of the foundation stones of modern photography.
translated:
he came back to me with a selection and we very quickly did the layout of the book.
people always imagine you need two or three weeks to do that.
we did it in one day.
we spread the whole book out on the floor, as you did at that time, on all fours.
as there were no double page spreads, just one picture after the other, we quickly agreed how the photos should be displayed, and that's how we did it.
he doesn't want you to be distracted by the book - he doesn't want you to look at more than picture at a time.
he doesn't want the eye to jump around.
he wants you to take each one in so that as you turn the page that retinal retention will superimpose one picture on the next one.
frank wants you, as with a movie projection, to be going through at the same speed so the subtlety of the pictures is what will make the movie, not the mechanical push/pull of the design of the book.
he gives structure very, very cleverly by starting each chapter with an american flag.
and it's the flag that obscures the human face.
from the very first image in the book, the flag is more important.
along with the american flag, there is a series of crosses, hidden, coded into it all the time.
there's a picture of a jehovah's witness and behind him in the stonework is a cross so that he becomes a crucified figure.
so you've got those two symbols as the basic grammar of the book, and it becomes the story of flags and hats and cigars and jukeboxes.
and you realise the whole book is a narrative, a kind of narrative of optimism that's died, the show is over, and frank understands that beautifully.
the book appeared in france in 1958, and a year later in america with an introduction by jack kerouac.
the critics hated what later generations of photographers came to revere.
translated:
it was badly received, something you doubtless know.
it didn't go down well in america where the critics said,
who is this insignificant swiss descending on the americans,
coming to explain to them that the 'american way of life'
isn't as extraordinary as people say?
it was like that.
we lost money.
but it wasn't that big a deal.
the kind of book that i do loses money all the time.
so i wasn't surprised.
as if the corrosive poetry of robert frank wasn't bad enough,
america also had to contend with the anarchic energy of william klein.
ok, let's go.
i have exactly six minutes.
if frank is a moody blues, then, then klein is bebop.
i mean his rhythm is a lot faster.
what else do you want to know?
how much money i make?
yeah.
he's always on the offensive.
being aggressive and trying to provoke a situation and being absolutely fearless.
klein came back to his native new york in 1954 after a six year sabbatical in paris where he trained as an artist, but this was no prodigal's return in sackcloth and ashes.
how did new york strike you when you went back?
how did it strike me?
right between the eyes.
new york was shitsville, you know?
it wasn't such a hot...
wasn't such a big deal.
can we say on tv that he said he wanted to give america a kick in the balls, cos that's what he said!
america's so full of shit.
you've got that?
for a photographer of klein's aggression and energy, there was one perfect outlet - the street.
photography discovered its inherent subject in the street.
the landscape photographers and the portrait photographers were, in some ways, more stymie because there was an enormous tradition there that they were trapped in.
but the photographers who worked on the street were willing to wing it, to risk it, make amazing discoveries.
my photographs were, you know, given to the corner drugstore and they came back, you know, thumb marks, smudged and out of focus.
i said "that's typical.
that's the kind of photograph i took.
but when i had access to a dark room and enlarged the photographs myself,
i realised that the photographs weren't all that bad and you could do something with them.
i could frame them differently, i could print them differently and so on.
that was the first time i realised i could do something with photography.
the street had always been an alluring place for photographers, but to start with, at least, it had proved to be elusive.
pioneer photographers could record the architecture easily enough, because it kept still, but the life of the street moved too fast for the long exposure times.
in this paris street scene by louis daguerre only the shoeshine man and his client stayed still long enough to leave a trace.
so the first street scenes show artfully staged set-ups... ..or what look like post-apocalyptic ghost towns.
gradually, the technology caught up.
citizens evolved from blurs to all too solid flesh, but the camera's struggle to keep pace with life on the streets left a rich legacy.
a visual language of blurs and grain that is unique to photography.
it is a language of stutters and stammers, but klein made it eloquent.
i like this photograph, it's maybe one of my favourite photographs because i didn't know what i was doing.
i was in the suburbs somewhere, in some waste land, and these kids were fooling around and i said, "dance.
and they danced.
and it's only the next day that i realised i like get this kind of blur, a picasso-like hand, a kid that some tv guy once said, "oh, i like that kid with the beard.
and that's what i like about photography.
you can overexpose and underexpose.
you can make everything cockeyed,
but it's not something you would do if you're drawing a portrait or painting a portrait.
and that's what's interesting in photography, it's the accidents.
you can think of klein as perhaps the first pop photographer.
klein isn't interested in the image in itself, but he's interested in the way this image can be arranged, cropped, put in different context.
he considered them as raw material.
it's kind of found footage of modern life that he takes into his books.
everyone is a kind of actor in front of william klein's lens, everything turned into a kind of show.
did people mind when you took their photograph?
oh, they loved it.
this is new york, you know?
there used to be a programme called king for a day and in new york everybody thought somebody was gonna call them up and say,
hey, mr zeus bum, how would you like to be king for the day?
no problem.
klein had acquired his first camera in a card game at the age of 18, a casual acquisition that would characterise his whole approach to photography.
trained as a painter in post-war paris, he felt no respect for photography's sacred cows.
i didn't really dig the french photography, you know, all these photographers now everybody reveres like doisneau and even cartier-besson, completely chic and polite and sentimental, romantic and humanistic.
so i said, "well, fuck that.
klein's idea of a photographer was arthur fellig alias weegee the famous, the legendary new york tabloid photographer.
i dug weegee.
he had a police radio in his car and he'd go running to the police station, he'd photograph all these dead mafia people and so on.
and he had this big 4x5 camera and a big cigar and a big, big mouth.
but he was a real new york icon, and he was great.
he was the photographic eye of the new york city working class.
he was the voice of the people.
he is their poet.
he's very fond of taking pictures of crowds in all kinds of situations - crowds looking at car accidents, crowds looking at movies.
he identifies with the crowd very strongly.
and they are not reserving their emotions.
they're not trying to be cool.
you see every emotion flickering across their faces.
and weegee is part of that crowd.
he just happens to be one looking at them and poking a camera in their direction.
like his tabloid hero, william klein cruised the sidewalks, jabbing his wide angled lens at whoever crossed his path.
this is a photograph that i happened on in the street.
i saw two kids playing cops and robbers and i said - one of them had a gun
i said, "hey, look tough.
klein has managed to provoke him to an exasperation where the kid just takes the gun and sticks it right into the lens of the camera.
it's so much inside the camera range that it's out of focus.
there's a child in profile also who's sweet and also quite confused-looking and much more intimidated by the whole situation.
and this kid is a little caught in the crossfire.
he makes the picture.
what i felt, at that moment, that it was a self portrait.
because i was this kid, and i was this kid.
i was timid and afraid of everything, and then i was also a kid who came on pretty strong and i would get into fights and so on.
so i was both.
great book maker.
he is probably the most internationally influential of any single book maker.
frank would have never cut up pictures and put six on a page and some in ovals or anything, he would never have been that playful either.
in the '60s, it opened up for photographers around the world to do their city books with that energy.
the one thing klein had more than anything else is energy.
he got new york too.
i mean, he got the subject, it was the right city to have that degree of energy.
to this day, the sidewalks of new york tempt the ambitious street photographer.
if you can make it there... 5th avenue is an addiction.
once you get the drift of it, and feel the energy of it, it makes you wanna go back again and again because it's where life seems to be.
going out to the street, being in this river of humanity and seeing unexpected incidents occur, how do you make the moment yours?
how do you become courageous enough to step into the space and take the picture out of it and learn how to confront the oncoming flow of people and insert yourself into it.
joel meyerowitz has spent 40 years answering these questions, ever since he threw over a career as an art director after seeing robert frank at work.
i have a show coming up and we're publishing a book, and i've got to get this book out, and this is a dummy miniature images so i can make a maquette to see how the book works,
and i've been actually working on this maquette for a couple of weeks.
and if you see anything that you think i should change, you tell me.
to start with, meyerowitz's ambitions, like so many others, were defined by cartier-bresson's much imitated, much misunderstood theory of the decisive moment.
at that time, i was interested in capturing an event because i didn't know any better and that was the language of the period... something happened in space and time, you try to be there and make an interesting shape, any picture about it.
i saw myself as a visual athlete, you know?
the ball comes!
the glove is in the right place at the right time.
for example, this is a catch picture, walking on the pont neuf or something like that and a man is walking his black and white capuchin monkey and a woman's coming along with her...in black and white of all things... with her baby in there and the two of them are seeing each other.
or, you know, just catching a pair of giant shoes walking along the street with people in them, and they run into a girl on crutches who's got a leg in a cast and she does this high kick for them.
i mean, i couldn't have planned that.
it's a kind of lunacy, you know?
every camera has a clock on it.
it says a second, it says 1/1000th of a second.
and you can choose to work within those time constraints.
and you actually can experience time.
if you know 1/1000th of a second... you can begin to believe that you see things in that split second.
and if you believe it, you'll begin to see it.
one of the great lessons for me was having absorbed cartier-bresson's decisive moment, there came a point when i had to reject it.
and re-imagine it somehow in new york.
cartier-bresson's europe had the sweet organisation of parisian streets and parks and squares and the elegance of it and the scale of it.
new york is sizzling with energy.
its skyscrapers and steel and glass and marble and it glitters and it's dynamic.
but big as it is, and dynamic as it is, people are rubbing up against each other all the time.
and they know each other's space.
they can pass within inches of each other without touching.
so it's full of beautiful possibilities, it's all this kind of bull fighting stuff that people do.
and within that is the kind of sexy sense of intimacy.
we come close to each other.
i mean, i like the idea of coming in real close to somebody, and by a gesture or a head turn, sort of dissuade them from thinking i'm photographing them.
so their mindset says "he's not interested in me.
and so they go blank to me.
when meyerowitz first began photographing in the early 1960s, 5th avenue was a happy hunting ground for some of the greatest names in contemporary photography.
lee friedlander and diane arbus worked these streets, as did garry winogrand who became a kind of pack leader for a generation of hungry young street photographers.
he invited me to his place on 93rd street on the west side, said "come on up sometime.
i'll show you some photographs." so, great.
i went, probably the next day, and what i saw was so astonishing.
in his house there were stacks of photographs.
if each of these boxes holds 250 prints,
garry had stacks that were about hip high.
so that is probably 1,500, 2,000 prints in a stack and there was a stack here and a stack there and a stack...
i mean, they were all over the place.
and i remember, i came into his living room and i sat down in his rocking chair and he gave me, he said "here, take a look at these.
it was amazing to just flip through them.
the wild wit of garry winogrand was everywhere, evidence.
it wasn't that i saw a style or a technique but i saw the generosity and the spirit and i thought to myself 'that's it, it's an appetite for life'.
you couldn't feel sorry for yourself around garry winogrand, you just couldn't.
when people would go on these trips and there's this whole sob story of going to mexico and then,
oh, we got dysentery and then it was too hot" and it was this and it was that.
and garry just spoke right over this poor guy and said,
it sounds like you're talking about your own comfort.
which, in new york-speak is to say "let's move on from there.
you know?
what does you own comfort have to do with anything?
he was the godfather in some ways.
he was always driven.
he was always obsessed.
when i first met garry, what i remember is sitting there, after he handed me these pictures he was smoking, he was drinking and he was shaking and tap, tap, tap - his feet were tapping on a chair, and his knees were shaking.
he was like, he was this engine that was throbbing.
it was a kind of nervous energy.
things responded to his energy.
photographers who photographed with him have said... ..that things were always happening when he was around, and he'd stop to reload and they'd stop.
and he'd be fully reloaded and ready to go and everything would start happening again.
he was perfectly willing to leer at women with his camera and without, i suspect.
they are about a certain kind of male looking that does go on.
but, at the same time, he also, i think, had a feeling for what kind of woman would respond more positively.
sometimes sexiness, but sometimes a kind of just bravado - "back at you, buddy.
you know? "you wanna leer at me?
i can leer at you too," you know?
and i'm not, you know, i'm not embarrassed by being gorgeous and female
any more than you are by being, you know, overweight and a man.
winogrand found some of his richest raw material in the zoos of new york.
when i first met garry he was just going through a divorce - a separation and divorce - and he had two young kids.
and on the weekends, in particular, he would take them to the zoo.
and we'd just go and hang out with the kids.
they would run around and, you know, look at the animals and garry was looking at the animals.
you could smile all through the book, they're animals, and you see them and then you stop and think, you know, they're heartbreaking photographs.
it's a photograph of the european brown bear and it's a sign describing what the bear is and all you see of the bear, the bottom jaw of the bear, reaching up.
this bear doesn't know he's european, he - he doesn't even know that he's a bear.
and it's a totally heartbreaking act.
in central park zoo winogrand made one of his most famous and unsettling images.
a lot of people when they first look at that picture they don't realise until the second or third beat that the guy hasn't got a bab, he's got a chimpanzee in his arms.
they see the interracial couple and they go "oh, my god, they've had a monkey.
it's such an outrageous kind of a gag, which is like a bad racist joke.
and that's exactly what winogrand was aiming at and why he glommed on to moments like that.
he liked to make pictures which he knew would make both the most liberal and educated and the most politically conservative people, make them both kind of upset.
that discomfort, i think, is part of the energy that feeds the photographs.
he did like to kind of startle people out of...what they thought was true.
among winogrand's acolytes was the british photographer, tony ray-jones.
ray-jones had moved to new york to train as a graphic designer, but like his friend, joel meyerowitz, he'd been lured away from the drawing board by the siren call of the street.
jones' notebooks from the period contained the distilled wisdom of the 1960s street photographer.
be more aggressive, get more involved, talk to people, stay with the subject, be patient, take simpler pictures.
don't take boring pictures.
get in closer.
in 1965 ray-jones returned home to see how lessons learnt in america could be applied here.
but in the 60s, britain was still what was once called
a right little, tight little island.
for the unguarded subjects and spontaneous situations he needed, there was only one place for tony ray-jones to go - the beach.
the place that british photographers have instead of the street.
the tradition of candid british seaside photography goes way back.
in 1896 paul martin was in great yarmouth with a camera disguised as a brown paper parcel.
the pictures he took showed the magic of the beach at work.
here at least it was possible to forget for a while what being victorian meant.
70 years later ray-jones turned the beach into a psychiatrist's couch, the place where the nation reclined and bared its soul.
family dramas.
displays of eccentricity.
dreams of love.
the damp disappointments of everyday life.
the beach and the seafront were the stage on which these classic themes were played out.
and ray-jones, with his new york trained eye, caught them all.
going to the seaside was a journey back in time, in a sense, to a country which was still struggling to become modern.
and that's what he wanted to find.
here was a place where you could record eccentricity and you could record some sort of essence of what people were about.
there's a sort of abandon about the seaside, you know?
you find people who are performing in a way that they wouldn't do and then in that performance they're revealing something of themselves that they wouldn't normally do.
inspired by frank and led by winogrand, ray-jones and the other 5th avenue photographers engaged directly with life on the street by turning the camera into an extension of their own personalties.
in these pictures the photographer is always a sensed presence, a wry observer guiding the camera, making it see what he sees of the human condition and the human comedy.
but left to its own devices, the camera can be nothing more than a slack-jawed dumb recorder of whatever is put in front of it, which is precisely what ed ruscha allowed it to be in a series of seminal books he produced in the 1960s,
milestones in the history of photography and pop art.
i mean, when i grew up, i just know that photographers were either nerds or they were pornographers.
and so... there was no real redeeming social value to somebody who has a camera and takes pictures.
but then as i started seriously working as an artist, travelling was essential, so i was continuously driving back and forth on us 66 between here and oklahoma when i would take all these gasoline stations.
ruscha's 26 gasoline stations offered an alternative to the humanistic concerns of the street photographers.
they were about things rather than people - surface rather than soul.
not the human drama of the street but the taken for granted backdrop against which the drama plays out.
i was after that kind of blank reality that that the subject matter would present.
i was met with a little bit of scepticism from some people and usually those people were like... more intellectual, and a lot of those people...uh...were, would have this impression from this little product, that i was putting them on.
but it seemed like somebody who worked in a gasoline station would say "hey this is great!
ruscha would go onto apply the same deadpan technique to parking lots seen from the air, and all the buildings on sunset strip.
i photographed this two and a half miles of this area of sunset boulevard called the strip.
and this was done with an automatic camera mounted in a pickup truck.
and what i was after is some kind of very democratic view of what this entire thing looks like.
not highlighting anything that is particularly... sociologically interesting or anything,
i would give as much attention to a concrete kerb as i would a building.
how long did it take to photograph all the buildings?
oh, this took about...
a better part of a day to do this.
you did it in a day?
mmm.
yeah.
oh, i've photographed all of sunset boulevard in one day's time.
that's 27 miles.
this is only two and a half miles.
but the deadpan ironies of pop art were not the only new ideas in play in the 1970s.
the biggest change of all came when some photographers began to see the world in a weird new way, in colour.
at the time, colour photography was as shocking as dylan going electric.
it's hard to really place yourself back in that time but... it was heretical, it just...you didn't do it.
i remember walking into a galleryist in new york city with my work in 1974 and he took a look and he asked me,
why are you working in colour?
black and white is so natural.
colour photography had been around since the 1860s but had flourished in the parts of photography's empire where commerce trumped art.
colour was found in advertising, fashion and glossy magazines - the places where photography sinned.
worst of all, colour was the natural language of the amateur snapshot.
by the 1970s, only serious art photographers saw the world in black and white.
i had met someone at a party in new york.
and we got to talking and he asked what i did, and i said i was a photographer.
and he said, "oh, can i see your pictures?" and i opened a box, and as soon as i opened the box he said, "oh, they're in black and white." and he really... wasn't exposed to art photography
and that impressed me that he was expecting, when i opened the box, he was expecting to see a colour photograph.
and it shocked him that it was black and white and i thought "what is this?
what's this convention about?
serious photography was in black and white.
martin, you started in black and white.
yeah, like everybody, really.
in the '70s, it's what you did.
yeah.
or before.
'60s, '70s also was harshly expensive seeming.
i mean, you had to have labs involved and you couldn't make your own decent prints.
and it was sort of taken out of your hands when you did colour.
for those able to shake off the convention, working in colour proved revelatory.
photography's about description.
and so if the camera describes things, then don't you want an instrument that describes more things?
and there's a certain moment
i thought colour will describe more than black and white.
when i switched to colour completely i had to work at slower speeds.
let's say 125th of a second or 250th of a second.
in order to get the depth of field, i had to step back.
when i stepped back, the content changed - it was no longer about something in the centre doing it, it was about everything.
so it's about the tiger in the window.
about the businessman entering the light.
about the blind man and his dog wearing little leather booties.
about this little cascade of women coming across the street with the tinkle of their beautiful legs in sunlight.
it was about the incredible depth of space.
i was trying to bring it altogether in a two-dimensional field.
and i kept saying to myself at the time, "these are field photographs.
they're overall.
i'm not making an incident-related thing.
i'm trying to work without a hierarchy of the catch in the middle
and then something else later on.
colour didn't just demand aesthetic adjustments, kit also had to be reassessed.
this is, this is an 8 by 10 inch.
this is an 8 by 10 inch camera.
in place of the discreet portable 35 mm cameras, photographers turned to large format view cameras, big enough to capture the fine detail they now craved.
so here's an 8 x 10 inch camera.
it folds open.
you do this.
and this thing... folds open.
and locks and then up comes the front.
and you put a lens in there.
it is the original voice of the medium.
this is the way photography was born, which was a box with a lens on the front and light came in and went onto a piece of film, and this is the size of the film.
so if you're talking about description, this piece of film compared to 35 millimetre.
here, this is a 35 millimetre piece of film, this is a piece of 8 x 10 inch film.
so if you want authenticity and description and power, spatial power...this.
street photographers who'd spent the 60s shooting from the hip found themselves trying to keep up with the '70s using 19th century cameras.
but it was another piece of kit, which had been gathering dust in photographers' cupboards for decades, that really changed things.
it also has to do with the tripod.
that it, because it's stationary, that the camera's not an extension of me, it's this tool that i'm fiddling with to make a picture.
and it stays where i made the last decision.
that sounds obvious and silly.
but i could hold a camera like this and, and kind of sway and the framing keeps changing.
here, this is where it is and then i can think about, and if i want to move it over, i pick it up and move it over a little, and it stays there.
and i can go back and look at it, and think about that decision, and if i wanna crank it up, i can crank it up.
it remembers your last thought.
yes, it remembers my last thought.
not everything changed, photographers still made journeys out into the world to see what the world looked like photographed.
travelling conceptually, shooting in colour and often struggling with tripods and heavy view cameras, they sought out the extraordinary in the ordinary.
what i wanted to do was to keep a visual diary of the trip.
and started photographing every person i met.
the beds i slept in.
the toilets i used.
art on walls.
every meal i ate.
store windows.
residential buildings.
commercial buildings.
main streets.
and then anything else that came my way.
and that became the.
framework for, for that series.
i drove in rental cars.
and i don't think they had tape decks at that point.
and so was it just top 40 radio or wherever the local radio station was, religious stations and country and western stations and sometimes, to entertain myself, i would recite shakespeare.
and after a couple of days,
i entered a very different kind of psychological state.
i think it has to do with simply keeping my attention focused for hours at a time and watching this road passing.
and i'm focusing straight ahead, and this world keeps passing by.
and after a couple of days of this,
i would be very energised and very clear and very focused.
and that would go on for weeks.
i can tell you what it was like.
you know there i was in this used volkswagen camper.
it seems like my tyres were always bald.
i always had $40 and a bag full of sunflower seeds.
and a few boxes of film.
and it was the most exciting time of my life.
every day, from before dawn to after sunset, i was just fascinated.
you know, i was only making two negatives a day, that's all i could afford.
and you would think that your days would be empty, if you're only pressing the shutter twice, but every second was filled.
not everyone in the 1970s was braving the open road.
one of the most influential photographers of the period was having his adventures closer to home.
and you've got a fair number of folks.
yeah.
so that must be his actual grave.
for most of us, memphis means elvis presley, but for photographers 'the king' means william eggleston.
we think of bill eggleston, don't we?
yeah, we think of bill.
do you think one day bill's house will be open to the public?
what do you mean?
it isn't even open for friends now, i figure out when he's awake!
eggleston's reputation rests on the colour photographs he took from the early '70s onwards of his home city memphis and the surrounding area.
the pictures caused a stir when they were first shown at new york's museum of modern art in 1976, and published subsequently in a book called william eggleston's guide.
inconsequential, indiscriminate and boring to some.
to others, the guide is suffused with a strange, baffling beauty.
eggleston's pictures contain all the acute observation of a master street photographer like winogrand, but their brightly coloured surfaces make them as unreadable as one of ed ruscha's gas stations.
eggleston, a man of few words, has called his pictures
democratic", adding that he is at war with the obvious.
he took colour at face value.
bill said "if i just make the colour hierarchy the structure
of the picture, can that work and still do realistic subject matter, still do the real world?
do you think he was literally saying that to himself?
yeah.
i mean, he extrapolated the whole idea, if pictures need to be structured, how does one structure a colour picture cos colour is more dominant.
that one little red stop light up there trumps this whole large volume area of green.
there's one of a shower stall that would be absolutely nothing.
it's sort of this bilious green and a dreadful pink and it's shot in flash.
and it, it feels, because of the colour, like it's like it's a shower in auschwitz or something.
it's in some holiday inn somewhere.
it's just to have the colour being able to twist the whole content.
psychological colour.
yeah.
eggleston's take is so particular, it's also eminently portable.
wherever he goes, his world travels with him.
in october 2005 he was persuaded to visit the port of dunkirk in northern france.
in a landscape of wind blown dunes, steelworks and container ships, far removed from the american south, eggleston sought out photographic treasure.
so my name is claire.
c-l-a-r... ..i-r-e.
thank you very much.
you're welcome.
when eggleston returned to dunkirk to open an exhibition devoted to his work, it was a chance for critics and journalists to see if they could turn the pure gold of his pictures into the hard currency of words and explanations.
no.
i have always worked...quite alone.
they didn't get very far.
i've never really thought about that.
food does exist, sort of like cars exist.
do you have any particular relation to edward hopper's...?
edward hopper?
yeah.
no.
actually it's quite difficult to talk about william eggleston's work, and he can't tell you the answer either.
actually not a lot of people are gonna make sense talking about it.
i don't know quite what you mean by that.
who am i to say?
hard to answer.
i regret that that's one of the stupidest questions i've ever been asked.
i like that picture, i don't know why.
i mean that picture's a very intriguing one because that looks like in america in some diner.
but also maybe i like it because it's done here but it looks so...not from here.
and it does look like a painting.
it looks totally abstract and it looks like something... when i'm in a cafe, i see something different in a cafe.
but i can't see that.
that's why i like it.
i'll tell you, i've replied before to a similar question, and the reply...
i've given in the past
i still will stick with.
i'm about photographing life today.
photographers continue to go out into the world in order to photograph life today.
their motives and their methods vary - colour or black and white.
lightweight 35 mm versus heavyweight view camera.
film versus digital.
but what they have in common is a watchful attentiveness to the world and its ways.
they see the things we miss or don't think about and then report back so that we have a chance to think again.
it seems to me photographers are angels not gods.
their job is not to create from nothing, but to better understand what is created and to better see the world so that the world is coherent, has meaning, has consequences, significance.
but photography has to build this out of the facts that we all know by walking dirty streets and living in dirty air.
you're not permitted like philosophers or theologians to fly off into the abstract.
and, and i think that's what, frankly, i think that's what has made photography into something of more than usual importance right now.
these places... mean something and part of the job is just trying to find what the hell that is.
__file_terminal__
two photographers are on the road.
martin parr and john gossage make very different kinds of pictures.
but the idea of a photographic journey is at the heart of what they both do.
what's that about?
yellow ribbon.
oh, yellow ribbon.
stop.
what's the significance of the yellow ribbon?
it came out of the iranian hostage situation.
they're in the middle of a five-day shootout, a photographic exploration of the mississippi delta in memphis, one of the most iconic cities in the american south.
the things that catch their eyes aren't the ones the average tourists would choose.
i'm gonna wander round the back.
all right.
see you in ten.
yeah.
i have a responsibility as a documentary photographer to photograph the times that we live in, what the world is about now, and particularly in america it is about the big chain shop, about the big sort of walmart or whatever it is.
my job is to try and capture what's going on.
now, if you get a great photo as well, that's a bonus.
i look at it and say, "i think there's something to be done here.
and it tends to be places where... no other photographers i know ever think that there's anything worth doing.
the american photographer garry winogrand once said that he took photographs to see what the world looked like photographed.
photographers have always had this as their mission statement.
but the three decades from the 1950s onwards were the real golden age of photographic journeys.
fuelled by existential restlessness, baby-boomer wanderlust, and cheap petrol, the photographers lit out for new territories to see what these worlds looked like photographed, and this is what they discovered.
the desert.
the open road.
the city street.
the beach.
the suburban nowheresville.
the man-altered landscape.
these are the places that photography owns, and this is the story of the journeys photographers made to claim them.
photography always wanted to be on the move, even before the technology was really up to it.
when timothy 0'sullivan penetrated the deserts of the american west in 1867, he brought his darkroom with him, pulled by four mules.
around the same time, the bisson brothers employed 25 porters to haul their equipment up the face of mont blanc, processing fragile glass-plate negatives in a darkroom tent thousands of feet above sea level.
the technology has come a long way since then, but any photographic journey worth making still demands blood, sweat and tears.
they say that timothy o'sullivan was a master at profanity, and i can believe it.
the actual physical work of getting out is often fairly arduous.
it involves a scramble.
it involves risking snakes and swatting at the bugs.
so it... it is a struggle.
but when you get to the top of the...
of the ridge, you've got a whole new scene to work with, and it's thrilling.
it's the greatest satisfaction you're gonna have all day.
so, no, it's... it's the view, uh... stupid.
it's an excuse to be in the world, really.
not just looking.
that's the crazy part of it.
it's being in the world.
this is something i do.
i take walks with my camera.
and i'm reminded of things.
i'm reminded of things that i didn't even know i knew, for instance, because i'm...
i'm engaged in the world.
i have known this field for the last 45 years.
and there's something about this field that i've always loved.
isn't this wild?
oh, shit.
this is what i was telling you about before.
now, that's part of why i'm interested in this field because i'm gonna photograph nature in all four seasons, and then these skydivers coming down, deus ex machina, you know?
it's sort of like...
oh, here he comes.
there.
he's in the frame there.
the history of photography is made up of journeys great and small, some as epic as a continent, some no longer than a city street.
but few have been as influential as one taken by robert frank.
it produced a book of photographs that laid bare the soul of 1950s america.
the seminal person, absolutely, after the war is robert frank.
the americans is one of the most extraordinary paper movies that's ever been made.
born in switzerland to jewish parentage,
robert frank brought an outsider's perspective to bear when he embarked on a nine-month road trip of his adopted home in 1956.
frank got a guggenheim fellowship to travel around the united states and document the kind of culture that he saw evolving here which he believed was...
was spreading elsewhere.
he started in new york, travelled south to south carolina, then on to texas, to california, then back to chicago and finally ending up back in new york.
there was a continuity to the way he travelled.
it's not the hop, skip and jump of the world-travelling cartier-bresson.
he got in a car, he saw the whole thing and he shot every place.
frank's journey produced the photographic equivalent of the great american novel, laying bare the anxieties that the chrome and the advertising jingles obscured.
though he'd been trained in a rigorous swiss tradition that aspired to photographic perfectionism,
frank's freewheeling odyssey echoed the spontaneity of abstract expressionist art and beat poetry.
he doesn't give a damn if the verticals are straight up and down or not, because he's literally standing in the middle of the picture he takes of, and, of course, jackson pollock stands in the middle of the paintings he makes too.
again, it's...
the kind of zeitgeist of abstract expressionism, that freedom, that release from the conventions of picture making that were earlier is there with frank.
kerouac described it, i think.
what did he...
he... he called frank's qualities agility, um... mystery, sadness, genius, and secret strangeness, and i think those really are the qualities that are there everywhere in those images.
at the end of his road trip, frank had nearly 700 rolls of film.
he brought his final selection to the french publisher robert delpire, and they set about designing a photo book that would become one of the foundation stones of modern photography.
he came back to me with a selection and we very quickly did the layout of the book.
people always imagine you need two or three weeks to do that.
we did it in one day.
we spread the whole book out on the floor, as you always did at that time, on all fours.
as there were no double-page spreads, just one picture after the other, we quickly agreed how the photos should be displayed.
and that's how we did it.
he doesn't want you to be distracted by the book.
in fact, he doesn't want you to look at more than one picture at a time.
he doesn't want the eye to jump around.
he wants you to take each one in, so that as you turn the page that little retinal retention will superimpose one picture on the next one.
frank wants you, as with a movie projection, to be going through at the same speed so that the subtlety of the pictures is what will accumulate and make the movie, not the mechanical push-pull of the design of the book.
he gives structure very, very cleverly, by starting each chapter with an american flag.
and it's the flag that obscures the human face, from the very first image in the book, the flag is more important.
along with the american flag there is a... a series of crosses hidden, coded into it all the time.
there's a picture of a jehova's witness and behind him in the stonework is a cross so that he becomes a crucified figure.
so you've got those two symbols as the basic grammar of the book and it becomes the story of flags and hats and cigars and jukeboxes.
and you realise the whole book is a narrative, a kind of narrative of...
of optimism that's died.
the show is over, and frank understands that beautifully.
the book appeared in france in 1958 and a year later in america with an introduction by jack kerouac.
the critics hated what later generations of photographers came to revere.
it was very badly received, something you doubtless know.
it didn't go down well in america, where the critics said,
who is this insignificant swiss descending on the americans,
coming to explain to them
that the american way of life isn't as extraordinary as people say?
it was like that.
we lost money, but it wasn't that big a deal.
the kind of book that i do loses money all the time... so i wasn't surprised.
as if the corrosive poetry of robert frank wasn't bad enough,
america also had to contend with the anarchic energy of william klein.
ok, all right, let's go.
i have exactly six minutes.
if frank is a moody blues, then... then klein is bebop.
i mean, his rhythm is a lot faster.
what else do you want to know?
how much money i make?
he's always on the offensive, being aggressive, and trying to provoke a situation and being absolutely fearless.
klein came back to his native new york in 1954 after a six-year sabbatical in paris where he'd trained as an artist.
but this was no prodigal's return in sackcloth and ashes.
how did new york strike you?
how did it strike me?
right between the eyes.
new york was shitsville, you know?
it wasn't such a hot...
it wasn't such a big deal.
can we say on television that he said he wanted to give america a kick in the balls?
cos i think that's what he said.
yeah, sure.
america's so full of shit.
you've got that?
for a photographer of klein's aggression and energy, there was one perfect outlet, the street.
photography discovered its inherent subject in the street.
the landscape photographers and the portrait photographers were in some ways more stymied because there was an enormous tradition there that they were trapped in.
but the photographers who work on the street, who are willing to wing it, to risk it, make amazing discoveries.
my photographs were...
were given to the corner drugstore and they came back, you know, thumb-marked, smudged, and out of focus.
i thought, "well, that's typical, of course.
that's the kind of photograph i took.
but when i had access to a darkroom and enlarged the photographs myself,
i realised that the photographs weren't all that bad and you could do something with 'em.
i could frame them differently, i could print them differently and so on.
and that was the first time i realised that i could do something with photography.
the street had always been an alluring place for photographers.
but to start with, at least, it had proved to be elusive.
pioneer photographers could record the architecture easily enough, because it kept still.
but the life of the street moved too fast for the long exposure times.
in this paris street scene by louis daguerre, only the shoeshine man and his client stayed still long enough to leave a trace.
so the first street scenes show artfully staged setups... or what look like post-apocalyptic ghost towns.
gradually the technology caught up.
citizens evolved from blurs to all-too-solid flesh.
but the camera's struggle to keep pace with life on the streets left a rich legacy, a visual language of blurs and grain that is unique to photography.
it is a language of stutters and stammers, but klein made it eloquent.
i like this photograph a lot, it's maybe one of my favourite photographs... ...because i didn't know what i was doing.
i was in the suburbs somewhere, in some wasteland, and these kids were fooling around, and i said, "dance," and they danced.
and it's only the next day that i realise that i get this kind of blur, a picasso-like hand, a kid that some television guy once said, "oh, i like that kid with the beard,
and that's what i...
that's what i like about photography.
you can overexpose, underexpose, you can make everything cockeyed.
but it's not something you would do if you're doing a... if you're drawing a portrait or... or painting a portrait, and that's what's interesting in photography, it's the accidents.
you can think of klein as perhaps the first pop photographer.
klein isn't interested in the image in itself, but he is interested in the way this image can be arranged, cropped, put in different contexts.
he considered them as raw material.
it's kind of found footage of modern life that he takes into his... into his books.
everyone is a kind of actor in front of william klein's lens.
everything turns into a kind of show.
did people mind when you took their photograph?
oh, they loved it.
this is new york, you know.
there used to be a programme called, uh...
king for a day and in new york everybody thought somebody's gonna call them up and say, "hey, mr zussbaum, how would you like to be king for the day?
"no problem.
klein had acquired his first camera in a card game at the age of 18, a casual acquisition that would characterise his whole approach to photography.
trained as a painter in postwar paris, he felt no respect for photography's sacred cows.
i didn't really dig the french photography.
you know, all these photographers that now everybody reveres like doisneau and even cartier-bresson, completely chic and polite and sentimental and romantic, and humanistic.
so i said, "well, fuck that.
klein's idea of a photographer was arthur fellig, alias weegee the famous, the legendary new york tabloid photographer.
i dug weegee.
he had a... a police radio in his car and he would go running to the police station and he'd... he'd photograph all these dead mafia people and so on.
and he had a big 4x5 camera and a big cigar and a big mouth.
but he was a real new york icon and he was great.
he was the... the photographic eye of the new york city working class.
he was the voice of the people.
he is their poet.
he's very fond of taking pictures of crowds, crowds in all kinds of situations.
crowds looking at car accidents, crowds looking at movies.
he identifies with the crowd very strongly and they are not reserving their emotions, they're not trying to be cool.
you see every emotion flickering across their faces, and weegee is part of that crowd, he just happens to be looking at them and poking a camera in their direction.
like his tabloid hero, william klein cruised the sidewalks, jabbing his wide-angle lens at whoever crossed his path.
this is a photograph that i happened on in the street,
i saw two kids playing cops and robbers, and i said to one of them who had a gun, i said, "hey, look tough.
klein has managed to provoke him to an exasperation where the kid just takes the gun and sticks it right into the lens of the camera.
it's so much inside the camera range that it's out of focus.
there's a child in profile also, who's sweet and also quite confused-looking, and much more intimidated by the whole situation and this kid is a little caught in the crossfire.
he makes the picture.
i felt at that moment that it was a self-portrait, because i was this kid and i was this kid.
i was timid and afraid of everything, and then i was also a kid who came on pretty strong, and i would get into fights and so on.
so i was both.
great book maker.
i mean, he is probably the most internationally influential of any single book maker.
i mean, frank would have never cut up pictures and put like six on a page and some in ovals or anything.
he would never have been that playful either.
in the '60s, it opened up for photographers all round the world to do their city books with the same energy.
the one thing klein had more than anything else is energy.
he got new york too.
on top of it, he got the subject.
it was the right city to have that degree of energy.
to this day, the sidewalks of new york tempt the ambitious street photographer.
if you can make it there.... fifth avenue is an addiction.
once you get the drift of it and feel the energy of it, it makes you want to go back again and again, because it's where life seems to be.
going out to this street, being in this river of humanity, and seeing unexpected incidents occur, how do you make the moment yours?
how do you become courageous enough to step into the space and take the picture out of it and learn how to confront the oncoming flow of people and insert yourself into it?
joel meyerowitz has spent 40 years answering these questions ever since he threw over a career as an art director after seeing robert frank at work.
i have a show coming up and we're publishing a book, and i've got to get this book out, and this is a dummy, miniature images, so i could make a maquette to see how the book works.
i've been actually working on this maquette for a couple of weeks, and if you see anything that you think i should change, you tell me.
six.
ten.
to start with, meyerowitz' ambitions, like so many others, were defined by cartier-bresson's much imitated, much misunderstood theory of "the decisive moment".
at that time i was interested in capturing an event, because i didn't know any better and that was the language of the period.
something happened in space and time, you tried to be there and make an interesting shapely picture about it.
i saw myself as a visual athlete.
you know?
the ball comes.
the glove is in the right place at the right time.
for... for example, this is a catch picture, walking on the pont neuf or something like that, and a man is walking his black-and-white capuchin monkey, a woman is coming along, in black-and-white, of all things, with her baby in there,
and the two of them are seeing each other.
or, you know, just catching a pair of giant shoes walking along the street, with people in them, and they run into a girl on crutches, who's got a... a leg in a cast,
and she does this high kick for them.
i mean, i couldn't have planned that.
it's a kind of lunacy, you know?
every camera has a clock on it.
it says a second and it says a thousandth of a second and you can choose to work within those time constraints and you actually can experience time.
if you know a thousandth of a second... ... you can begin to believe that you see things in that split second and if you believe it, you'll begin to see it.
one of the great lessons for me was, having absorbed cartier-bresson's "decisive moment", there came a point when i had to reject it and reimagine it somehow in new york.
cartier-bresson's europe had the sweet organisation of parisian streets and parks and squares and the elegance of it and the low scale of it.
new york is sizzling with energy.
it's skyscrapers and steel and glass and marble and it glitters and it's dynamic.
but big as it is and dynamic as it is, people are rubbing up against each other all the time.
they know each other's space.
they can pass within, you know, inches of each other without touching,
so it's full of beautiful paso dobles.
it's all this kind of bullfighting stuff that people do.
and within that is the kind of sexy sense of intimacy.
we come close to each other.
i mean, i like the idea of coming in real close to somebody and, by a gesture or a head turn, sort of dissuade them from thinking i'm photographing them.
so their... their mindset says, "he's not interested in me,
and so they go blank to me.
when meyerowitz first began photographing in the early 1960s,
fifth avenue was a happy hunting ground for some of the greatest names in contemporary photography.
lee friedlander and diane arbus worked these streets, as did garry winogrand, who became a kind of pack leader for a generation of hungry young street photographers.
he invited me to his place on 93rd street in the west side.
he said, "come on up some time, i'll show you some photographs.
great.
i went probably the next day, and what i saw was so astonishing.
in his house there were stacks of photographs.
lf... if each of these boxes holds 250 prints
garry had stacks that were about hip high, so that is probably 1,500, 2,000 prints in a stack.
and there was a stack here and a stack there and a stack...
i mean, they were all over the place.
and i remember i came into his living room, and i sat down in his rocking chair and he gave me...
he said, "here, take a look at these.
it was amazing to just flip through them.
the wild wit of garry winogrand was everywhere evident.
it wasn't that i saw a style or a technique, but i saw the generosity and the spirit, and i thought to myself, "that's it, it's an appetite for life.
you couldn't feel sorry for yourself around garry winogrand.
you just couldn't.
when people would go off on these trips and there's this whole sob story of going...
i think it was to mexico and then, oh, he got dysentery and then it was too hot, and it was this and it was that, and garry just spoke right over this poor guy and said, "it sounds like you're talking about your own comfort,
which in new york speak is to say, "let's move on from there.
you know, it's...
what does your own comfort have to do with anything?
he was the godfather in some ways.
he was always driven.
he was always obsessed.
when i first met garry, what i remember is sitting there after he handed me these pictures.
he was smoking, he was drinking and he was shaking and tapping.
so that he was tap-tap-tap.
his feet were tapping and his knees were shaking.
i mean he was like...
he was this engine that was throbbing.
it was a kind of nervous energy.
things responded to his energy.
photographers who photographed with him have said, um... that things were always happening when he was around, and he'd stop to reload and they'd stop.
and he'd be fully reloaded and ready to go and everything would start happening again.
he was perfectly willing to leer at women, with his camera and without, i suspect.
they are about a certain kind of male looking that does go on.
but at the same time he also, i think, had a feeling for what kind of woman would respond more positively, sometimes sexiness, but sometimes a kind of just bravado "back at you, buddy.
you know, "you want to leer at me?
i can leer at you too.
and i'm not... you know, i'm not embarrassed by being gorgeous and female
any more than you are by being, you know, overweight and a man.
winogrand found some of his richest raw material in the zoos of new york.
when i first met garry, he was just going through a divorce, a separation, and he had two young kids.
and on the weekends in particular he would take 'em to the zoo.
and we would just go and hang out with the kids.
they would run around and look at the animals, and garry was looking at the animals.
you know, you could smile all through the book.
they're animals and you see them.
and then you stop and think, you know, they're heartbreaking photographs.
it's a photograph of the european brown bear and it's a sign describing what the bear is and all you see of the bear is the...
the bottom jaw of the bear reaching up.
this bear doesn't know he's european.
he doesn't know what he was.
he doesn't even know that he's a bear.
i mean, it's a totally heartbreaking act.
in central park zoo,
winogrand made one of his most famous and unsettling images.
a lot of people, when they first look at that picture, they don't realise until like the second or third beat that the guy hasn't got a baby or something, he's got a chimpanzee in his arms.
they see the interracial couple and they think, "my god, the two of 'em had a monkey.
it's such an outrageous kind of a gag, which is like a bad racist joke.
and that's exactly what winogrand was aiming at and why he glommed onto moments like that.
he liked to make pictures which he knew would make both the most liberal and educated and the most politically conservative people... make 'em both kind of upset.
that discomfort, i think, is part of the energy that feeds the photographs.
he did like to kind of startle people out of what they thought was true.
among winogrand's acolytes was the british photographer tony ray-jones.
ray-jones had moved to new york to train as a graphic designer.
but like his friend joel meyerowitz, he'd been lured away from the drawing board by the siren call of the streets.
jones' notebooks from the period contain the distilled wisdom of the 1960s street photographer.
be more aggressive.
get more involved.
talk to people.
stay with the subject.
be patient.
take simpler pictures.
don't take boring pictures.
get in closer.
in 1965, ray-jones returned home to see how lessons learned in america could be applied here.
but in the '60s,
britain was still what was once called "a right little, tight little island".
for the unguarded subjects and spontaneous situations he needed, there was only one place for tony ray-jones to go, the beach, the place that british photographers have instead of the street.
the tradition of candid british seaside photography goes way back.
in 1896, paul martin was in great yarmouth with a camera disguised as a brown paper parcel.
the pictures he took show the magic of the beach at work.
here, at least, it was possible to forget for a while what being victorian meant.
seventy years later, ray-jones turned the beach into a psychiatrist's couch, the place where the nation reclined and bared its soul.
family dramas, displays of eccentricity, dreams of love, the damp disappointments of everyday life.
the beach and the seafront were the stage on which these classic themes were played out, and ray-jones, with his new york-trained eye, caught them all.
going to the seaside was a journey back in time, in a sense, to a country which was still struggling to become modern, and that's what he wanted to find.
here was a... a place where you could record eccentricity, and you could... you could record some sort of essence of what people were about.
there's a sort of abandon about the seaside, you know, you find people who are performing in a way that they wouldn't do, and then in that performance they're revealing something of themselves that they wouldn't normally do.
inspired by frank and led by winogrand,
ray-jones and the other fifth avenue photographers engaged directly with life on the street by turning the camera into an extension of their own personalities.
in these pictures, the photographer is always a sensed presence, a wry observer guiding the camera, making it see what he sees of the human condition and the human comedy.
but left to its own devices, the camera can be nothing more than a slack-jawed, dumb recorder of whatever is put in front of it.
which is precisely what ed ruscha allowed it to be, in a series of seminal books he produced in the 1960s, milestones in the history of photography and pop art.
when i grew up, i just knew that photographers were either nerds or they were pornographers.
and so they...
there... there was no redeeming social value to somebody who has a camera and takes pictures.
but then as i started seriously working as an artist, travelling was essential, so i was continuously driving back and forth on us 66 between here and oklahoma, when i would take all these gasoline stations.
ruscha's twentysix gasoline stations offered an alternative to the humanistic concerns of the street photographers.
they were about things rather than people, surface rather than soul.
not the human drama of the street, but the taken-for-granted backdrop against which the drama plays out.
i was after that kind of blank reality that... that the subject matter would present.
i was met with a little bit of scepticism from some people, and usually those people were like, uh... more intellectual
and a lot of those people... would have this impression from this little product that i was putting them on.
but it seemed like somebody who worked in a gasoline station would say, "hey, this is great, this is great.
ruscha would go on to apply the same deadpan technique to parking lots seen from the air and all the buildings on sunset strip.
i photographed this, uh... two and a half miles of this area of sunset boulevard called the strip.
and, uh... this was done with an automatic camera mounted in a pick-up truck.
and what i was after is some kind of very democratic view of what this entire thing looks like, not highlighting anything that is particularly sociologically interesting or anything.
i would give as much attention to a concrete kerb as i would a building.
how long did it take to photograph all the buildings?
oh, this took about the better part of a day to do this.
you did it in a day?
mm-hm, yeah.
oh, i've photographed all of sunset boulevard, in a... one day's time.
that's 27 miles.
this is only two and a half miles.
but the deadpan ironies of pop art were not the only new ideas in play in the 1970s.
the biggest change of all came when some photographers began to see the world in a weird new way, in colour.
judas!
at the time, colour photography was as shocking as dylan going electric.
it's hard to really place yourself back in that time, but it... it was heretical.
it just...
you didn't do it.
i...
i remember walking into a gallerist in new york city, with my work, in 1974, and he took a look and he asked me, "why are you working in colour?
black-and-white is so natural.
colour photography had been around since the 1860s, but had flourished in the parts of photography's empire where commerce trumped art.
colour was found in advertising, fashion and glossy magazines, the places where photography sinned.
worst of all, colour was the natural language of the amateur snapshot.
by the 1970s, only serious art photographers saw the world in black-and-white.
i had met someone at a party in new york, and we got to talking, and he asked what i did and i said i was a photographer, and he said, "oh, can i see your pictures?
and i opened a box, and as soon as i opened the box he said, "oh, they're in black-and-white.
and he really wasn't exposed to art photography.
and that impressed me, that he was expecting, when i opened the box, he was expecting to see a colour photograph.
it shocked him that it was black-and-white, and i thought, "well, what is this?
what's this convention about?
i mean, it just...
serious photography was in black-and-white.
martin, you started in black-and-white.
yeah, like everybody, really.
in the '70s it's what you did, or before.
yeah.
'60s, '70s, also was punishingly expensive-seeming.
you had to have labs involved and you couldn't make your own decent prints.
it was sort of taken out of your hands when you did colour.
for those able to shake off the convention, working in colour proved revelatory.
photography's about description.
and so if the camera describes things, then don't you want an instrument that describes more things?
and there's a certain moment i thought,
colour will describe more than black-and-white.
when i switched to colour completely, i had to work at slower speeds.
let's say one hundred and twenty-fifth of a second or two hundred and fiftieth of a second.
in order to get the depth of field, i had to step back.
when i stepped back, the content changed.
it was no longer about something in the centre doing it.
it was about everything.
so it's about the tiger in the window, "yarrhh!
about the businessman entering the light.
about the blind man and his dog wearing little leather booties.
about this little cascade of women coming across the street with the tinkle of their beautiful legs in sunlight.
it was about the incredible depth of space.
i was trying to bring it all together in a two-dimensional field.
and i kept saying to myself at the time, these are field photographs.
they are overall.
i'm not making an incident-related thing,
i'm trying to work without a hierarchy of the catch in the middle and then something else later on.
colour didn't just demand aesthetic adjustments.
kit also had to be reassessed.
this is... this is an eight by ten inch...
this is an eight-by-ten-inch camera.
in place of the discreet portable 35mm cameras, photographers turned to large-format view cameras big enough to capture the fine detail they now craved.
so here's an eight-by-ten-inch camera.
it folds open.
you do this.
and this thing... folds open, and locks, and then up comes the front,
and you put a lens in there.
it is the original voice of the medium.
this is the way photography was born, which was a box with a lens on the front and light came in and went onto a piece of film and this is the size of the film.
so if you're talking about description, this piece of film, compared to 35mm...
here, this is a 35mm piece of film.
this is a piece of eight-by-ten-inch film.
so if you want authenticity, and description and power, spatial power... this.
street photographers who had spent the '60s shooting from the hip found themselves trying to keep up with the '70s using 19th-century cameras.
but it was another piece of kit which had been gathering dust in photographers' cupboards for decades that really changed things.
it also has to do with the tripod.
that it... because it's stationary, that the camera's not an extension of me, it's this tool that i'm fiddling with to make a picture.
and it stays where i made the last decision if that... that sounds obvious and silly, but i could hold a camera like this and... and kind of sway, and the framing keeps changing.
here, this is where it is, and then i can think about it, and if i want to move it over, i pick it up and move it over a little, and it stays there.
i can go back and look at it and think about that decision.
if i want to crank it up, i can crank it up.
it remembers your last thought.
yes, it remembers my last thought.
not everything changed.
photographers still made journeys out into the world to see what the world looked like photographed.
travelling conceptually, shooting in colour, and often struggling with tripods and heavy view cameras, they sought out the extraordinary in the ordinary.
what i wanted to do was to keep a visual diary of the trip and started photographing every person i met, the beds i slept in, the toilets i used, art on walls, every meal i ate,
store windows, residential buildings, commercial buildings, main streets, and then anything else that came my way.
and then that became the framework for... for that series.
...amen if you got it all fixed up by jesus... i drove in rental cars and i don't think they had tape decks at that point so it was just top-40 radio or wherever the local radio station was,
religious stations and country-and-western stations, and sometimes to entertain myself i would recite shakespeare.
and after a couple of days, i entered a...
a very different kind of psychological state.
i think it has to do with simply keeping my attention focused for hours at a time, and watching this road passing.
i'm focusing straight ahead, and this world keeps passing by.
and after a couple of days of this,
i would be very energised and very clear and very focused, and that would go on for weeks.
i can tell you what it was like.
you know, there i was in this used volkswagen camper.
it seems like my tyres were always bald,
i always had 40 dollars and a bag full of sunflower seeds and a few boxes of film and it was the most exciting time of my life.
every day from before dawn till after sunset, i was just fascinated.
you know, i was only making two negatives a day.
that's all i could afford.
and you would think that your days would be empty, you know, if you're only pressing the shutter twice.
but every second was filled.
not everyone in the 1970s was braving the open road.
0ne of the most influential photographers of the period was having his adventures closer to home.
you got a fair number of folks.
yeah.
so that must be his actual, um... grave.
for most of us, memphis means elvis presley.
but for photographers, the king means william eggleston.
we think of bill eggleston, don't we?
yeah, we... we think of bill.
do you think one day bill's house will be open to the public?
it isn't even open to friends now.
you have to figure out when he's awake.
eggleston's reputation rests on the colour photographs he took from the early '70s onwards of his home city memphis and the surrounding area.
the pictures caused a stir when they were first shown at new york's museum of modern art in 1976 and published subsequently in a book called william eggleston's guide.
inconsequential, indiscriminate and boring to some.
to others, the guide is suffused with a strange, baffling beauty.
eggleston's pictures contain all the acute observation of a master street photographer like winogrand, but their brightly coloured surfaces make them as unreadable as one of ed ruscha's gas stations.
eggleston, a man of few words, has called his pictures "democratic", adding that he is "at war with the obvious".
he took colour at face value.
bill said, "if i just make the colour hierarchy the structure of the picture,
can that work, and still do realistic subject matter, still do the real world?
was he literally saying that to himself?
yeah, i mean, he extrapolated the whole idea,
well, if pictures need to be structured, how does one structure a colour picture?
because colour is more dominant.
that one little red stoplight up there trumps this whole large volume area of green.
there's one of a shower stall that would be absolutely nothing...
it's sort of this bilious green and a dreadful pink and it's shot in flash, and it... it feels, because of the colour, like it's...
like it's a shower in auschwitz or something.
i mean, and it's some holiday inn somewhere.
it's just to have the colour being able to twist the whole content.
psychological colour.
yeah.
eggleston's take is so particular, it's also eminently portable.
wherever he goes, his world travels with him.
in 0ctober 2005, he was persuaded to visit the port of dunkirk in northern france.
in a landscape of windblown dunes, steelworks and container ships, far removed from the american south,
eggleston sought out photographic treasure.
good morning.
so, my name is claire.
c-l-a-r...
i-r-e.
thank you very much.
you're welcome.
when eggleston returned to dunkirk, to open an exhibition devoted to his work, it was a chance for critics and journalists to see if they could turn the pure gold of his pictures into the hard currency of words and explanations.
no.
i have always worked quite alone.
they didn't get very far.
i've never really thought about that.
food does exist, sort of like cars exist.
do you have any particular relation to edward hopper's...
edward hopper?
yeah.
no.
it's quite difficult to talk about william eggleston's work.
and he can't tell you the answer either.
and... and actually not a lot of people are probably gonna make sense talking about it.
i don't know quite what you mean by that.
who am i to say?
hard to answer.
granted that's one of the stupidest questions i've ever been asked.
i like that picture.
i don't know why.
that picture is a very intriguing one, because that looks like in america in some diner, but also maybe i like it because it's done here but it looks so not from here.
and it does look like a painting.
it looks totally abstract and it looks like something...
when i'm in a café i see something different in a café...
mm.
...i can't see that.
that's why i like it.
i'll tell you,
i've replied before to a similar question.
and... the reply i have given in the past
i still will stick with.
i'm about photographing life today.
photographers continue to go out into the world in order to photograph life today.
but their motives and their methods vary.
colour or black-and-white.
lightweight 35mm versus heavyweight view camera.
film versus digital.
but what they have in common is a watchful attentiveness to the world and its ways.
they see the things we miss or don't think about and then report back so that we have a chance to think again.
it seems to me photographers are angels not gods.
their job is not to create from nothing but to better understand what is created and to better see the world so that the world is coherent, has meaning, has consequence, has significance.
but photography has to build this out of the facts that we all know by walking dirty streets and living in dirty air, and you're not permitted, like philosophers or theologians, to fly off into the abstract.
and... and i think that's what... frankly, i think that's what has made photography into something of more than usual importance right now.
these places mean something, and part of the job is just trying to find out what the hell that is.
__file_terminal__
the gare saint-lazare, paris.
in 1933, something was captured near here by artist and photographer henri cartier-bresson.
armed with a revolutionary new camera, he shot a moment.
this moment.
it took only a fraction of a second to bag, but came to be known as "a decisive moment", now the most familiar concept in all of photography.
it's a strategy that has illuminated photography's potential for all of us.
in germany that same year,
hitler's national socialist party enjoyed its own moment.
within six years, the decisive moment and the historical moment would collide on the battlefields of europe.
the result would be iconic images of war by legendary photojournalists like robert capa.
photojournalism was born in the chaos of modern warfare.
but when the fighting finally stopped, the question remained of just how good photography had been at explaining what all the blood and suffering had been about.
we thought that was the world.
now we realise there were a lot of myths in that.
i mean, trusting the photograph was probably a huge mistake from the beginning.
this is henri cartier-bresson, the godfather of photojournalism.
from the early 1930s, he prowled the streets, snapping moments, fleeting action that found its perfect expression and true meaning through the content and composition of the picture.
bresson, a surrealist sympathiser, always maintained that he was first and foremost a painter, but his "decisive moments" transformed the face of photography.
bresson's pictures were about being in the right place at the right time.
he could step into a space and see the theatrical possibilities.
it might be at the top of a flight of stairs that wended their way down to the street below, and he had a sense, "if i hang out here, someone's gonna bike along.
he understood that into this space life will come.
so it's a game of pounce.
cartier-bresson was a...
had been a big-game hunter.
he'd... he'd gone shooting things and he was a stalker.
you had to wait for this animal to appear.
you stalked that animal, and at that moment you had to be ready to shoot.
photographers pounce on this fraction of a second because there's a capacity to read all of this flux of... of daily life, and see in it, in that tiny moment, some truth.
bresson's photograph of a man jumping over a puddle in paris is a classic example of a decisive moment, seemingly casual but charged with significance.
to some people it's a picture of a guy jumping over a puddle, but there... there's that sort of generic european jewish name on the poster.
there's the guy jumping into the unknown.
the broken hoop.
the first thing, probably, man ever made was a wheel, and this is a broken one.
and throughout history, people have referred to the broken hoop and the wheel that's cracked and so forth.
that must have been for hundreds of years the biggest... thousands of years, probably the biggest disaster that could happen to anyone is have your wheel break.
he was the nostradamus of the early '30s who predicted what was gonna happen to europe in that one single image.
europe jumping into the unknown.
and it's a great, great photograph for that reason.
the interesting thing about photography is that you know when you press that shutter whether that visual orgasm has occurred or not.
you sort of know it.
it... it bypasses bits of the brain that...
and your eye.
you just know it.
the feeling you get when you look at it, which is that this guy has turned round and snapped, and caught a moment, that's not how it was.
and i think that... that's a big fantasy that the photography world has suggested, is that people have just got this kind of god-given gift of capturing something.
so many decisions have been made, in quite a measured way, up until the point that that picture was taken.
the photographer's decided where to be, they've decided once they're there where they're gonna take the picture from, what camera they're gonna use, what film they're gonna use.
they've made all these decisions.
that he'd waited for it?
yeah.
that doesn't mean to say that he said, "here's 50 francs.
jump over this puddle.
or "can you bring a broken hoop in?
nonsense.
of course not.
he saw something.
he pushed the camera through a gap in the fence and got what i have personally described as "the greatest photograph of the 20th century".
you've got to remember about cartier-bresson that he was a surrealist.
that was his milieu.
the... the surrealists really did believe that there was a super-reality behind appearances, and occasionally it would reveal itself, and you'd just have to wait for that to happen.
that's what makes me gasp, you know.
i'm awake.
when the action enters the physical space, he knows how to time it so that it reaches its apogee...
...at a point, and that's the decisive moment.
bresson was only able to capture such moments because of a revolutionary development in camera technology.
the leica, launched in germany in 1925.
compact, quiet, and with the latest lens technology, it gave birth to a whole new style of instant photography.
he must have had one of the first leicas.
there couldn't have been very many on the market.
he... he was a rich boy.
he had enough money, at any rate, to have that.
and i think that was the moment, in... in a way, that nobody ever would have anticipated.
it allows... allows you to really be present in the moment and glide through the moment.
the thing about it is that the window is here so when you look through the camera this eye is open so that you can actually watch the world.
most other single-lens reflex cameras go in front of your face so they block off the vision.
the leica was the chosen tool of hungarian-born photojournalist robert capa, who became famous for capturing the ultimate in decisive moments...
...the death of a spanish civil war soldier cut down by a bullet in 1936.
when civil war became world war, in 1939,
capa brought fame, heroism and charisma to the war photographer.
working for life magazine, he maintained that the first rule of photojournalism was to get close and the second, to get closer.
it earned him a reputation as the world's greatest war photographer, and its first real celebrity.
i envied him because he was handsome and he attracted all the women.
and capa was a superb journalist.
i always hesitated to call him a great photographer, but i called him a great journalist.
it was astounding, i think, to me as a young teenager, that a photographer could risk his life.
the idea that photography was that important was simply mind-boggling.
ultimately what one wants to say is, "this picture, i believe it,
because of that name under it, or on the back of the print,
because we know that he sticks to what photography's always been best at doing, which is capturing reality.
people believe pictures.
it's a photograph that's in your passport, not a painting.
now, george bernard shaw said,
i would exchange every painting of christ for one snapshot.
that's what the power of photography is.
the power of a famous photojournalist like capa was to be able to choose his battles, to drop in and out of the conflict.
in less glamorous circumstances, tony vaccaro photographed world war ii, not on assignment but on a daily basis as an ordinary gi.
tony had been a soldier in the war, and, of course, soldiers don't get recognition for their photo...
he had been a... a soldier photographer, and he made perhaps the best pictures of world war ii of any soldier photographer.
the camera was always on my neck, never on my shoulder.
on my neck.
and a gun always here.
and i could easily hold the gun and do this.
it's strange that some photographers who deserve great recognition never achieve it.
my guess is that tony was primarily a journalist even as a soldier.
and i think that's why his record of the war from a soldier's standpoint is so outstanding.
the regular soldier photographer was expected to record events with standard army equipment.
the issue camera was the speed graphic.
that's insane.
here it is, the speed graphic.
you focus through there.
you can, er...
this has two pictures.
the film is placed underneath this.
you close this.
you see the accident?
i pulled both out.
then you look through here to take a picture.
turn it over.
meantime, bullets are going around.
see what things can happen.
eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen.
thirty-two pictures.
35mm camera.
all we need is 36 here.
vaccaro's ambitions to be a photojournalist meant that he had to do better than the cumbersome speed graphic.
unlike capa, he couldn't afford a leica and went to war with the more modest argus c3.
i am compared with robert capa quite often, because he took a picture of a soldier dying in front of his camera,
i took a picture of a soldier dying in front of my camera.
he maintained, and he got this from hemingway, that war is romantic.
i'm sorry.
i said, "bob, you are dead wrong.
as a soldier, vaccaro couldn't help but be close to the action.
closer even than capa.
when a german tank was bombed right in front of his eyes, it was photography, not survival, that he was thinking about.
i see the turret open, and came out this person.
he was fine, but soon as he opened the turret, he blew up.
something happened that diesel went all over, and he's burning.
i heard his... "mutter, mutter." "mother, mother," he was saying to himself.
now i am down.
i felt that the picture should be taken a little higher.
and so i went on the tip of my toes, and as i am there and clicked,
i hear bullets hitting the tank, on this side, "tuh-tuh-tuh-tuh!
and i dove and landed here with my head.
i stayed down and i look at him and i read what he has here for the first time, "gott mit uns,
god is with us.
0n d-day, the greatest military operation in history, involving over one million men on the allied side alone,
robert capa was the only photojournalist who went with the first wave of troops onto 0maha beach to capture nothing less than the very face of history in the making.
everyone was waiting for pictures.
life magazine was under extreme deadline pressure to publish.
but it was 48 hours before picture editor john morris received capa's exposed film.
so i asked the darkroom to rush development and there were four rolls of 35mm and bob had written a note saying that all the action was in those four rolls and those were the...
the pictures he took as he'd landed.
and a few moments after i gave the command, if you want to call it that, this young hysterical darkroom boy came rushing into my office saying the films were all ruined, and i said "what happened?" and he said, "well, you were in such a hurry,
i put the... the four rolls in the drying cabinet and closed the doors,
which was not normal procedure.
and there was too much heat and the emulsion ran.
so i ran back and found that there were...
three rolls were gone but on the fourth there were 11 frames and those are the ones that, fortunately, survived.
these are perhaps the most famous of all war images, pictures that say as much about the challenge of being in the right place at the right time with a camera as they do about the experience of fighting for your country and for your life.
without the luxury of a magazine back home waiting to process his vulnerable film,
tony vaccaro decided to develop it himself on the battlefield in soldiers' helmets.
but he needed the right chemicals.
one day, i went into a town called saint-denis, and i found the ruins of a camera store.
i look in...
i start removing rocks, and there it is, you know?
the chemicals.
i'm standing in a foxhole, and i put the chemical in the first helmet, water in the next, hypo in the third and water in the fourth helmet.
and a moonless night.
june of 1944.
and i remove the film from the cassette and i start my first roll, you know, going like this.
and i had one of those timers that i could see at night, you know.
i would check 11 minutes.
and at 11 minutes i shake it a little, went into the water a couple of turns, then into the hypo for five minutes.
i check the time, and then, er... shake it a little.
and into the water.
change the water a couple of times.
that was it.
and i'd hang the film, the negatives now, on the branches of the nearest tree.
and next morning...
and i went to sleep and the thing is there.
so i went to sleep.
i woke up.
i look.
perfect.
but the ten rolls vaccaro developed that night were destroyed by the army censor.
they contained images of dead gls, decisive moments the world wasn't yet ready to accept.
after the war, capa went to hollywood to take pictures on the set of hitchcock's film notorious.
tony vaccaro stayed in germany, photographing its occupation and reconstruction.
what had photography really done for our understanding of events in world war ii?
it had captured important moments, many of which were close up and personal.
it seemed good at effects but bad at causes.
it suggested that history is about more than meets the eye.
there is so much more to the things that we think we know from afar, that the closer you get to it, the more complex it is, not the simpler it is to understand.
when you're photographing anything to do with war and conflict, you're photographing something impossible, you're photographing a...
everything you do is just clumsy and stupid and half-witted, because it's impossible to... to portray the full width and breadth of the things that you're up against.
it's kind of like from a... the difference of maybe looking at a mosaic from afar where you have a myriad of pieces that give you a sense of an image, and then the closer you get to it, it starts to pixelate and fall apart,
but you really have to stand far back, and the closer you get, the less sure you are of how well these little pieces fit together.
photography had already shown that there was an alternative to being in the right place at the right time.
this is roger fenton's picture, called the valley 0f the shadow 0f death, taken in 1885, a year after the charge 0f the light brigade.
cannonballs were all he had to play with but it says as much about the nature of war as any image from the front line.
that's a picture that has no dead bodies in it, no exploded buildings, but it's a powerful picture in terms of what was the experience like to have been in that place at that time, to have saddled on and clippety-clopped "half a league, half a league onward
through that hail of cannonballs.
and yet the picture doesn't have any of those things in it, apart from just this detritus of cannonballs.
it draws you in and says,
imagine what it would be like for you to run through this place.
the history of photography is littered with images taken long after the event, pictures that still speak eloquently about what had already happened.
this is a photograph of a bullet-torn, bloodstained shirt, the one worn by the archduke maximilian when he faced a mexican firing squad.
in the immediate aftermath of world war ii, photography's task became horribly simple, to provide undeniable historical proof of nazi atrocities, documenting crime scenes of unimaginable proportions.
but after the war, the tangled relationship between photography and historical truth would become apparent even in a calamity as black-and-white as the holocaust.
this is lodz in poland, the site of an infamous nazi ghetto.
it was here that henryk ross, along with 164,000 other polish jews, was incarcerated for four years until the ghetto was liquidated in 1944.
but ross was a photographer, and he kept a unique record of what really happened here.
the nazis had put the running and policing of the ghetto in jewish hands, a situation that created a system of privilege among its inhabitants.
there were those who had the merest chance of survival... and those who had none.
among his many duties as one of the ghetto's official photographers,
ross had to document the production of goods by the inhabitants of lodz, sold to make money for their captors.
ross was a propaganda photographer at one level.
i mean, he was employed by the department of administration and statistics.
he produced identity card pictures.
he worked within the graphics department that had the responsibility for promoting the goods that were made in the ghetto and which many people would...
would view as a form of collaboration.
this building was the department of administration and statistics, where ross worked.
although he had become a propaganda photographer for his german jailers, he was a photojournalist before the war.
simply by looking out of his office window here, he could see that life for the jews was becoming progressively worse.
he decided to document it.
we're in the apartment of some people whose breakfast we've interrupted.
so this is where the...
the bridge was over the main street.
this is zgierska street, part of the main thoroughfare of lodz, which was known here as aryan street.
and initially when...
i think when the ghetto was set up, jews could cross at leisure, but gradually restrictions came in and... and the bridge was built and at the point that jews couldn't walk on the street at all.
lodz wasn't a death camp but it was a staging post.
most of its inhabitants were eventually deported from here on trains, never to be seen again.
the early deportations were to chelmno, which is in that direction.
that was the death camp that the... the nazis initially set up.
and as they perfected their methods at auschwitz, which is in that direction, that's where the majority of the jews of lodz were ultimately sent.
part of the way ross saw his role, his responsibility, even, as a photographer, was to document what was happening here and he was able one night to smuggle himself in, spent the night in the building to the side here,
documenting one of the deportations, as german troops herded people onto these carriages or carriages like them.
he almost certainly would have been killed, as... as would his family, had he been caught.
this is what remains of the hospital in lodz ghetto, where ross photographed jewish police preventing the sick and elderly from escaping, knowing that they were being rounded up for deportation.
ross obviously enjoyed free movement within the police.
i mean, the jewish police had no problem with him, and it doesn't look from the pictures like they had a problem with him photographing them.
so i don't think he was taking the same degree of risk as he was down at the railway station while people were being deported on trains.
this was him trying to use his camera as a vehicle for recording these important moments.
i mean, the other pictures that he took that he was clear that he was risking his life taking was of the hangings in the ghetto square.
before the liquidation of the ghetto,
ross buried all his negatives in this garden, hoping they might survive even if he didn't.
amazingly, both he and the negatives did, and in 1961 his most incriminating pictures helped hang war criminal adolf eichmann.
but there were other photographs ross had taken that had no place in the courtroom and until recently no place in our image of the holocaust.
as well as his other pictures,
ross had, in an unselfconscious way, photographed the everyday life of the ghetto, including marriages, religious ceremonies, and parties.
in these pictures we see a happy, well-fed jewish elite and scenes that show some uncomfortable truths about the ghetto system, like a little boy dressed up as a lodz policeman in his own ghetto-made uniform, playing a game of "arrest your best playmate".
the battle over this material is partly the argument... partly rests in the argument that nobody...
there was no joy in the ghetto, and these pictures certainly do challenge that.
contrary to any thought that they might complicate the picture of german cruelty, or any question about the extent of the holocaust, they actually give a very, very clear idea of how the german war machine in that period managed the holocaust.
there's something very immediate about photography.
there's something very powerful about these pictures.
you can't look at these pictures without knowing that everyone... or almost everyone in them was killed before the war was over.
photo-historian chris boot recently published a more representative selection of ross's images as well as organising public events to discuss the pictures.
anyone who had survived the ghetto might now see them for the first time.
i was sitting with my daughter and we started seeing these photographs, and suddenly i said, "oh, i knew this person.
another photograph appeared.
i said, "i knew this person.
and we come to the last photograph, and i looked at this photograph and i said, "i knew this person very well,
this man playing the accordion was my boyfriend, my first love,
and... and in the camp.
and suddenly my daughter, who sat next to me, said to me, "but, mummy, you are next to him.
well, i was just...
i was laughing, crying,
i...
i just didn't know how to react.
it... it was amazing.
amazing feeling.
no, there were fun times.
there were concerts.
there were theatres, jewish theatres.
there were hairdressers, there were...
it was a little jewish state.
and hunger, yes.
you... you eat pieces from the wall.
you eat any... anything.
and... and for many years, i didn't want to think about it.
are you glad to see those pictures?
yes, absolutely.
yes.
more than you're upset by them?
more than i'm sad, yes.
i'm...
i'm very pleased to see them.
in japan, the photographic legacy of world war ii proved to be even more indecisive and tangled than in the victorious west.
the physical impact of the war here had been so different that even the simple act of conveying its horrors wasn't easy.
these cities were so crowded and the construction was so flimsy that they dropped almost 100% incendiaries and just burned out the cities.
there is no really stunning photography of japan after the war comparable to the photography of german cities because the german cities always have those masonry and church steeples rising to the sky.
there were still things standing.
but here everything is flat burned out.
there aren't even any bomb craters, and so it's very difficult to photograph.
in two of the most decisive moments in history,
august 6th and august 9th 1945, the americans detonated atomic bombs above the cities of hiroshima and nagasaki.
two flashes killed over 200,000 japanese in an instant.
the american military's photographic records of what remained are extensive.
but unlike photographic records of the holocaust, their pictures completely ignored any evidence of human suffering.
they were interested in physical damage, because their task was to measure,
what is the effect of the bomb 100 metres, 200 metres,
1,000 metres, 8,000 metres from the epicentre?
what the americans turn their cameras away from is the human victims.
this is a surviving copy of the very magazine that finally delivered photographic evidence of the human cost to the japanese, seven years after the event.
japanese photographers had begun taking pictures within hours of the blasts but their images were confiscated by the americans and suppressed until the end of their occupation.
jostling for position next to ads featuring grace kelly lookalikes, these are the images that helped japan begin to view itself not only as the aggressor but also the victim.
but pictures like these were still nowhere to be seen when photography made its most public statement on behalf of humanity only three years later.
photography's big response to a world rapidly moving from hot to cold war was this.
the family 0f man, an exhibition that opened in new york in 1955, comprised of over 500 images, from 273 photographers both amateur and professional.
it was selected from literally millions of images.
five travelling versions toured the world, netting nine million visitors by 1964.
staged as a walk-through version of life magazine, it would be the most popular photographic show of all time, photography's biggest moment.
we'd had 20 or so years of mass-media magazines.
it's just at the dawning of television.
so in many ways it's a last statement about photography as the defining mass medium of the age.
that statement is still standing over 50 years later inside this fairytale-like castle in clervaux, luxembourg.
the exact same prints, carefully orchestrated to preach the exact same humanistic message,
we're all the same underneath", can still be seen in all its timeless naive wonder.
0r you can buy the book, which has never been out of print.
there is a sense of the audience for the show being encouraged into a kind of dream state, something rather removed, actually, from social realities.
although the pictures all come from social realities, they're brought together to make this slightly abstract tone poem about what it is to be human.
we all live, we all die, we all laugh, we all cry, sometimes we go to war, avoids the real historical and political and economic and ideological factors that affect everybody's lives, and prevents them from being a family of man.
the show was a sticking plaster for the wounds of war.
but it represented everything photojournalism's deity henri cartier-bresson stood for.
he had several images in the exhibition.
but the younger generation of photographers like robert frank were against having their pictures used to prop up nothing more than well-intentioned propaganda.
what the show suppresses, if you like, is the individual view of the photographer.
you'd get the impression, going around the show, that all the photographers felt the same, that the photographers were themselves a family of man, and this is just not true.
the exhibition still concludes with an optimistic cliché,
w eugene smith's photograph of his own children walking in his own garden out into the light, the beginning of their sentimental journey through life.
smith embraced the show's humanistic message, but the very year it opened, he proved in dramatic fashion that he was firmly outside any photographic family.
in 1947, top photojournalists robert capa, henri cartier-bresson,
george rodger and david seymour, had created the photo agency magnum.
formed as a cooperative, it declared that its photographers would retain their negatives and copyright in their pictures.
smith would join them later and drag an infant magnum to near bankruptcy.
but for now he was a star turn at life magazine.
i first worked with james smith, uh...
i think it was in october 1939.
i was just a young reporter on the life magazine staff.
he wanted to photograph war the way it was.
he... he made pictures which are... you know, in some ways more damning of war than robert capa's pictures.
i mean, he... he made a sea of corpses.
he refused to let life touch his negatives, uh... if he could help it.
i remember ed thompson, the managing editor, saying to me once,
if you want to put smith on that story, you... you do it.
i don't want anything to do with him.
anyway, smith was the most difficult man i ever knew.
smith became america's greatest photo essayist.
but his increasingly obsessive pursuit of the story caused life magazine problems.
for the assignment "country doctor", he stalked his subject for 23 days, ignoring demands from his employers that he return.
in 1955, he quit life, joined magnum, and came here to pittsburgh for his first routine independent assignment, to produce 100 photographs in three weeks to celebrate the city's centenary.
but smith's real plan was much more ambitious.
three weeks turned into a three-year commitment, as he attempted to describe, understand, and better the world he saw around him, with no less than 21,000 photographic moments.
eugene smith loved william faulkner, and he had clips of william faulkner's quotes all over his loft.
and one of the quotes was about thomas wolfe, the writer.
william faulkner said that...
wolfe was trying to put the entire history of the human heart on the head of a pin.
and i think that's what smith was trying to do with his photography.
he really thought that when he finished his pittsburgh project, people were gonna look at it and change their behaviour.
you know, culture was gonna be changed by what he was showing.
when he came here to pittsburgh, he saw nature, this extraordinary geographic environment here, the natural environment, and the heaviest industry america ever had, and immigrants from all over europe were here.
there was destruction and construction.
there was wealth and poverty.
there was these beautiful rivers and it all just came together into this one bundle here in pittsburgh.
he was ready to erupt with a massive photographic project and i really believe that it would have happened no matter where he'd gone, because he quit life magazine in january of 1955, and his mother died in february of 1955.
his relationship with his mother was...
was deep and complex.
she was domineering and she was always telling him how bad he was doing, and how, you know, even when he was world famous, she would write him letters and say, "gene, when are you gonna wake up and do something worthwhile?
smith never "woke up", perhaps because he rarely ever went to sleep, which was hard on his photographic assistants.
i'd be working till three in the morning, and flop out, and, uh... the next morning at ten he's still working.
but he used to use amphetamines.
we didn't know that word then.
it was called dexedrine, which even my sisters used to use to lose weight.
i...
i never thought of it as speed.
smith took amphetamines constantly, like...
like dozens of pills every day.
they were for the purpose of keeping him awake, so he could accomplish more work.
he was addicted to his work, and in his life there's not a lot of evidence that he did much else besides work.
but he was also addicted to alcohol, and he would go in these cycles of up and down, and harold told me that, uh...
he was joking but he said they used to drink ferrous cyanide, acid that they used to bleach their prints to increase the contrast between light and dark colours, and harold said they used to drink the stuff.
with the original assignment long lost,
smith now began draining magnum's meagre coffers.
spiralling into bankruptcy and professional suicide, he eventually chose 2,000 core images of pittsburgh selected from 7,000 prints that had been painstakingly crafted.
i always sensed the demon was his mother.
but the problem... the reason he was crazy is he cared.
i was a master printer at the time so i could do some of his printing, and his printing was extraordinary.
he had a sense of...
of darkening and lightening.
he used to use ferrous cyanide, which could accentuate the lighting in certain areas of the print.
he cared about the details.
he cared about the whole thing.
at that point, the photographer was someone you sent out to point a camera to take a picture of that and that and that.
w eugene smith's photo essay of pittsburgh was never sold.
his magnum opus ended up pinned to bulletin boards all around his loft.
the world he wanted to change never saw it.
i was unpublishable.
it really was.
it was unpublishable from the start.
and there was no way to publish 2,000 photographs in a book.
there was no way to exhibit them anywhere.
that's one of the mysteries of this story of smith and why did he care so much about his work.
and i think it's the same question you ask about, you know, prophets,
old testament prophets.
why did they care so much?
and smith certainly saw himself in that light.
i mean, he really believed that there was a truth that he could find, and i don't think that people believe that today.
smith's pittsburgh project suggested that decisive moments, even in their thousands, were not enough to get to the bottom of the american postwar experience.
for japanese photographers, the legacy of the past and the political complexities of the present were even harder to unravel.
america had continued to use the pacific as a nuclear test site throughout the early '50s and the japanese had once again suffered casualties.
as part of a growing anti-nuclear movement in japan, in the early '60s photographers returned to hiroshima and nagasaki, for the first time since 1945.
tomatsu went down to nagasaki and did some of the really, really iconic photographs that we now associate with nagasaki.
shomei tomatsu has become one of japan's greatest photographers.
but in 1961 he was just a kid on an assignment.
sixteen years after the event, there would be no d-day photo opportunity in nagasaki and no place for a traditional war photographer.
i saw for the first time how these people had been living for 16 years.
over that time, nagasaki had turned into an exotic place, like naples.
and for the most part, there was no evidence of what had happened.
bomb victims found it embarrassing to go out in public, so they didn't go out much at all, and a lot of them would avoid any form of eye contact with other people.
even after 16 years, those around them, especially children, didn't know they were bomb victims.
when they got on the buses, for example, children would shout, "there's a ghost!
even though they were all living together, these people were forgotten in their own communities.
the culture shock was so great, i couldn't process my feelings while i was working.
later, when it wasn't my job any more, for many years i went back.
and every time i returned, i got to know the people i photographed even more.
tomatsu didn't only photograph those who carried the terrible and psychological effects of the blast, but other kinds of scars.
shattered christian statues, broken statues that had been blackened and charred, very powerful.
a very simple item suddenly becomes awesome, like a pocket watch that suddenly stopped at the time the bomb fell.
or a bottle that has been twisted into some... almost like a grotesque deformed human foetus, you know, and it's the notion that the world we cherish, which is a world of ordinary objects, and everyday things,
no longer exists.
tomatsu's images are, in some respects, a return to the valley 0f the shadow 0f death.
they question the very necessity to be present during the action, a red rag to the classic war photographer.
the great thing about photography is, unlike almost all the other art forms, is to practise, you have to be there.
and as the great master cartier-bresson says, as you discover the external world, you discover more about the internal world, and it's an upward spiral, and in the end you become eloquent at telling and seeing and understanding,
and your pictures are great for that reason.
given the choice, you're always there before it happens.
next choice is when it happens and third choice is when it's all over.
and the problem often is that once the circus has left town, it's a pretty boring town.
i think the days of that kind of classic photojournalist, you know, the kind of testosterone-driven, main kind of macho guy, out at the front line, is over.
watching somebody, you know, falling backwards, dying from a bullet, what is that telling us?
you know, we kind of learn to accept this notion that war is inevitable and these are kind of ritual punctuations that we're gonna see every day when we open up the newspaper.
photographs have become important in a different way.
the medium has, by its nature, become a more reflective look at things.
generally, photographers arrive in places after the event now, rather than at the event.
during a real event, you have tv crews up at the front.
then the photographers come in and make something more... more of an analysis, perhaps.
this is a good example of how we would approach the theme or the subject of suicide, a suicide bomb, rather than showing blood, blood, pools of blood on the street minutes after it's happened.
i think there's something more sinister and more unnerving about these images, which are recreations of real suicide bombs that palestinians have built, and disguised as... as everyday objects, as a watermelon, you can see.
broomberg and chanarin's photographs are, like the image of a stopped watch or a twisted bottle, pictures of the relics of war.
photographs of seemingly innocent, everyday objects made chilling by what they speak of, not what they show.
but what happens when warfare becomes invisible?
the 0uter hebrides.
no bullets flying.
no bombs exploding.
modern conflict at its most covert.
a challenge for photographer simon norfolk.
these waters off the coast of these islands, between the outer hebrides and scotland, are the largest submarine exercise area in europe.
this airspace is the biggest low-flying training zone in europe.
this island here has the biggest...
i think it's the biggest in the world, testing range where you can fire missiles.
the fact that you can't see the troposphere, you can't see the submarines, and you can't see the ionosphere, and you can't see the radar systems,
i think just makes it more interesting to me, really.
i wanted to talk about this particular submarine exercise area.
the light was gorgeous.
i found that the colour was great.
and the presence of the salmon nets in the water is slightly odd, strange, slightly surreal.
and also politically very interesting, because i was looking at the right thing.
so it felt like several units just started to stack up.
so you... you get a feeling about things.
all the interesting stuff that happens in war is happening in these spheres.
the money is not being built on spending a new battle tank.
moving men around in little metal boxes round a desert is totally 1980s.
heroism's changed.
war has changed.
but photojournalism is still stuck in the 1940s.
my argument is that even if not a single picture is ever published, they exist, and that means that we are recording the history of the human race.
if that's all you're doing, it's still a very, very worthwhile profession to be involved in.
whatever the arguments about photography and how it deals with history, when you are in the right place at the right time, it's a question of shoot first and ask questions later.
this is ground zero in new york.
today, anyone can take their own pictures of where the twin towers once stood.
but on the day, photographer joel meyerowitz discovered this wasn't so easy.
i did something i've done my entire life.
i picked up my leica.
and as i put it to my eye, someone behind me punched me on my shoulder.
i turn around and it's a black woman cop.
and she says, "no photographs, buddy.
this is a crime scene.
and i said, "what are you talking about, lady?
i said, "this is a street.
this is a public thoroughfare.
she said, "i told you, no photography allowed.
i mean, i thought, "whoa!
if there's no photographs, then there's no history.
i thought, "fuck them.
i'm gonna get in there and i'm gonna make these pictures.
we need a record.
meyerowitz spent eight months on this site with a large format camera, photographing the aftermath,
access that even television couldn't secure.
it was moving under my feet the entire time.
shaking.
could hardly use the tripod most of the times, it was so shaky.
ask jon snow.
what i liked about joel was that if you turned up there to meet him at ground zero, you had to, of course, pretend you were part of his staff.
he doesn't have any staff.
it was as if he was part of the operation.
he had this huge camera, huge old wooden and brass thing.
wood and photographs?
do they still do that?
well, yes, at scenes of crime they do.
i photographed the entire thing in colour, because... to photograph it in black-and-white would be to keep it as a tragedy.
because there's a tragic element to photographing... in this case not war, but the collapse, right?
it was just destruction.
the incident was so immediate, and so catastrophic and on such a scale, that it was very, very difficult on the day to grasp the enormity of it.
it was only the aftermath, wandering through the rubble, that began to cut through that and you began just to think about the life that had gone on where you were standing.
you see, i don't know whether we think in moving images or whether we think in still images.
i...
i have a suspicion that on our hard drive are a series within our brains of still photographs of very important moments in our lives, be they domestic or international, be they of the family, of birth, of death,
but we think in terms of still images, and what the photographer is doing is making direct contact with the human hard drive and recording for all time a sense of what happened.
what happened at the ghetto in lodz is, thanks to photography, now at least visibly clearer.
henryk ross's pictures certainly helped helen aronson come to terms with her own experiences.
when finally published, they also led her to another ghetto survivor, her first love.
and that's him as he is now.
he's 89.
and, of course, we just...
reminiscence how it used to be.
and this is me with him and the book.
talking about photographs.
this is something very personal.
i have nothing from my childhood and so on, but the only thing that survived with me all the war were pictures of my sister.
they were the only things that i kept.
nothing else.
so when people ask me, "if you had to leave your home,
what is the most important things you would take?"...
pictures.
if there's no photographs, then there's no history.
he really believed that there was a truth that he could find.
so it's a game of pounce.
the reason he was crazy is he cared.
god is with us.
people believe pictures.
"no photographs, buddy.
this is a crime scene.
"...trusting the photograph...
__file_terminal__
the gare saint-lazare, paris.
in 1933, something was captured near here by artist and photographer henri cartier-bresson.
armed with a revolutionary new camera, he shot a moment.
this moment.
it took only a fraction of a second to bag, but came to be known as "a decisive moment", now the most familiar concept in all of photography.
it's a strategy that has illuminated photography's potential for all of us.
in germany that same year,
hitler's national socialist party enjoyed its own moment.
within six years, the decisive moment and the historical moment would collide on the battlefields of europe.
the result would be iconic images of war by legendary photojournalists like robert capa.
photojournalism was born in the chaos of modern warfare.
but when the fighting finally stopped, the question remained of just how good photography had been at explaining what all the blood and suffering had been about.
we thought that was the world.
now we realise there were a lot of myths in that.
i mean, trusting the photograph was probably a huge mistake from the beginning.
this is henri cartier-bresson, the godfather of photojournalism.
from the early 1930s, he prowled the streets, snapping moments, fleeting action that found its perfect expression and true meaning through the content and composition of the picture.
bresson, a surrealist sympathiser, always maintained that he was first and foremost a painter, but his "decisive moments" transformed the face of photography.
bresson's pictures were about being in the right place at the right time.
he could step into a space and see the theatrical possibilities.
it might be at the top of a flight of stairs that wended their way down to the street below, and he had a sense, "if i hang out here, someone's gonna bike along.
he understood that into this space life will come.
so it's a game of pounce.
cartier-bresson was a...
had been a big-game hunter.
he'd...he'd gone shooting things and he was a stalker.
you had to wait for this animal to appear.
you stalked that animal, and at that moment you had to be ready to shoot.
photographers pounce on this fraction of a second because there's a capacity to read all of this flux of...of daily life, and see in it, in that tiny moment, some truth.
bresson's photograph of a man jumping over a puddle in paris is a classic example of a decisive moment, seemingly casual but charged with significance.
to some people it's a picture of a guy jumping over a puddle, but there...there's that sort of generic european jewish name on the poster.
there's the guy jumping into the unknown.
the broken hoop.
the first thing, probably, man ever made was a wheel, and this is a broken one.
and throughout history, people have referred to the broken hoop and the wheel that's cracked and so forth.
that must have been for hundreds of years the biggest...thousands of years, probably the biggest disaster that could happen to anyone is have your wheel break.
he was the nostradamus of the early '30s who predicted what was gonna happen to europe in that one single image.
europe jumping into the unknown.
and it's a great, great photograph for that reason.
the interesting thing about photography is that you know when you press that shutter whether that visual orgasm has occurred or not.
you sort of know it.
it...it bypasses bits of the brain that...
and your eye.
you just know it.
the feeling you get when you look at it, which is that this guy has turned round and snapped, and caught a moment, that's not how it was.
and i think that...that's a big fantasy that the photography world has suggested, is that people have just got this kind of god-given gift of capturing something.
so many decisions have been made, in quite a measured way, up until the point that that picture was taken.
the photographer's decided where to be, they've decided once they're there where they're gonna take the picture from, what camera they're gonna use, what film they're gonna use.
they've made all these decisions.
that he'd waited for it?
yeah.
that doesn't mean to say that he said, "here's 50 francs.
jump over this puddle.
or "can you bring a broken hoop in?
nonsense.
of course not.
he saw something.
he pushed the camera through a gap in the fence and got what i have personally described as "the greatest photograph of the 20th century".
you've got to remember about cartier-bresson that he was a surrealist.
that was his milieu.
the...the surrealists really did believe that there was a super-reality behind appearances, and occasionally it would reveal itself, and you'd just have to wait for that to happen.
that's what makes me gasp, you know.
i'm awake.
when the action enters the physical space, he knows how to time it so that it reaches its apogee...
- ..at a point, and that's the decisive moment.
bresson was only able to capture such moments because of a revolutionary development in camera technology.
the leica, launched in germany in 1925.
compact, quiet, and with the latest lens technology, it gave birth to a whole new style of instant photography.
he must have had one of the first leicas.
there couldn't have been very many on the market.
he...he was a rich boy.
he had enough money, at any rate, to have that.
and i think that was the moment, in...in a way, that nobody ever would have anticipated.
it allows...allows you to really be present in the moment and glide through the moment.
the thing about it is that the window is here so when you look through the camera this eye is open so that you can actually watch the world.
most other single-lens reflex cameras go in front of your face so they block off the vision.
the leica was the chosen tool of hungarian-born photojournalist robert capa, who became famous for capturing the ultimate in decisive moments...
- ..the death of a spanish civil war soldier cut down by a bullet in 1936.
when civil war became world war, in 1939,
capa brought fame, heroism and charisma to the war photographer.
working for life magazine, he maintained that the first rule of photojournalism was to get close and the second, to get closer.
it earned him a reputation as the world's greatest war photographer, and its first real celebrity.
i envied him because he was handsome and he attracted all the women.
and capa was a superb journalist.
i always hesitated to call him a great photographer, but i called him a great journalist.
it was astounding, i think, to me as a young teenager, that a photographer could risk his life.
the idea that photography was that important was simply mind-boggling.
ultimately what one wants to say is, "this picture, i believe it,
because of that name under it, or on the back of the print,
because we know that he sticks to what photography's always been best at doing, which is capturing reality.
people believe pictures.
it's a photograph that's in your passport, not a painting.
now, george bernard shaw said,
i would exchange every painting of christ for one snapshot.
that's what the power of photography is.
the power of a famous photojournalist like capa was to be able to choose his battles, to drop in and out of the conflict.
in less glamorous circumstances, tony vaccaro photographed world war ii, not on assignment but on a daily basis as an ordinary gi.
tony had been a soldier in the war, and, of course, soldiers don't get recognition for their photo...
he had been a...a soldier photographer, and he made perhaps the best pictures of world war ii of any soldier photographer.
the camera was always on my neck, never on my shoulder.
on my neck.
and a gun always here.
and i could easily hold the gun and do this.
it's strange that some photographers who deserve great recognition never achieve it.
my guess is that tony was primarily a journalist even as a soldier.
and i think that's why his record of the war from a soldier's standpoint is so outstanding.
the regular soldier photographer was expected to record events with standard army equipment.
the issue camera was the speed graphic.
that's insane.
here it is, the speed graphic.
you focus through there.
you can, er...
this has two pictures.
the film is placed underneath this.
you close this.
you see the accident?
i pulled both out.
then you look through here to take a picture.
turn it over.
meantime, bullets are going around.
see what things can happen.
eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen.
thirty-two pictures.
35mm camera.
all we need is 36 here.
vaccaro's ambitions to be a photojournalist meant that he had to do better than the cumbersome speed graphic.
unlike capa, he couldn't afford a leica and went to war with the more modest argus c3.
i am compared with robert capa quite often, because he took a picture of a soldier dying in front of his camera,
i took a picture of a soldier dying in front of my camera.
he maintained, and he got this from hemingway, that war is romantic.
i'm sorry.
i said, "bob, you are dead wrong.
as a soldier, vaccaro couldn't help but be close to the action.
closer even than capa.
when a german tank was bombed right in front of his eyes, it was photography, not survival, that he was thinking about.
i see the turret open, and came out this person.
he was fine, but soon as he opened the turret, he blew up.
something happened that diesel went all over, and he's burning.
i heard his... "mutter, mutter. " "mother, mother, " he was saying to himself.
now i am down.
i felt that the picture should be taken a little higher.
and so i went on the tip of my toes, and as i am there and clicked,
i hear bullets hitting the tank, on this side, "tuh-tuh-tuh-tuh!
and i dove and landed here with my head.
i stayed down and i look at him and i read what he has here for the first time, "gott mit uns,
god is with us.
0n d-day, the greatest military operation in history, involving over one million men on the allied side alone,
robert capa was the only photojournalist who went with the first wave of troops onto 0maha beach to capture nothing less than the very face of history in the making.
everyone was waiting for pictures.
life magazine was under extreme deadline pressure to publish.
but it was 48 hours before picture editor john morris received capa's exposed film.
so i asked the darkroom to rush development and there were four rolls of 35mm and bob had written a note saying that all the action was in those four rolls and those were the...
the pictures he took as he'd landed.
and a few moments after i gave the command, if you want to call it that, this young hysterical darkroom boy came rushing into my office saying the films were all ruined, and i said "what happened?" and he said, "well, you were in such a hurry,
i put the...the four rolls in the drying cabinet and closed the doors,
which was not normal procedure.
and there was too much heat and the emulsion ran.
so i ran back and found that there were...
three rolls were gone but on the fourth there were 11 frames and those are the ones that, fortunately, survived.
these are perhaps the most famous of all war images, pictures that say as much about the challenge of being in the right place at the right time with a camera as they do about the experience of fighting for your country and for your life.
without the luxury of a magazine back home waiting to process his vulnerable film,
tony vaccaro decided to develop it himself on the battlefield in soldiers' helmets.
but he needed the right chemicals.
one day, i went into a town called saint-denis, and i found the ruins of a camera store.
i look in...
i start removing rocks, and there it is, you know?
the chemicals.
i'm standing in a foxhole, and i put the chemical in the first helmet, water in the next, hypo in the third and water in the fourth helmet.
and a moonless night.
june of 1944.
and i remove the film from the cassette and i start my first roll, you know, going like this.
and i had one of those timers that i could see at night, you know.
i would check 11 minutes.
and at 11 minutes i shake it a little, went into the water a couple of turns, then into the hypo for five minutes.
i check the time, and then, er...shake it a little.
and into the water.
change the water a couple of times.
that was it.
and i'd hang the film, the negatives now, on the branches of the nearest tree.
and next morning...
and i went to sleep and the thing is there.
so i went to sleep.
i woke up.
i look.
perfect.
but the ten rolls vaccaro developed that night were destroyed by the army censor.
they contained images of dead gis, decisive moments the world wasn't yet ready to accept.
after the war, capa went to hollywood to take pictures on the set of hitchcock's film notorious.
tony vaccaro stayed in germany, photographing its occupation and reconstruction.
what had photography really done for our understanding of events in world war ii?
it had captured important moments, many of which were close up and personal.
it seemed good at effects but bad at causes.
it suggested that history is about more than meets the eye.
there is so much more to the things that we think we know from afar, that the closer you get to it, the more complex it is, not the simpler it is to understand.
when you're photographing anything to do with war and conflict, you're photographing something impossible, you're photographing a...
everything you do is just clumsy and stupid and half-witted, because it's impossible to...to portray the full width and breadth of the things that you're up against.
it's kind of like from a...the difference of maybe looking at a mosaic from afar where you have a myriad of pieces that give you a sense of an image, and then the closer you get to it, it starts to pixelate and fall apart,
but you really have to stand far back, and the closer you get, the less sure you are of how well these little pieces fit together.
photography had already shown that there was an alternative to being in the right place at the right time.
this is roger fenton's picture, called the valley 0f the shadow 0f death, taken in 1885, a year after the charge 0f the light brigade.
cannonballs were all he had to play with but it says as much about the nature of war as any image from the front line.
that's a picture that has no dead bodies in it, no exploded buildings, but it's a powerful picture in terms of what was the experience like to have been in that place at that time, to have saddled on and clippety-clopped "half a league, half a league onward
through that hail of cannonballs.
and yet the picture doesn't have any of those things in it, apart from just this detritus of cannonballs.
it draws you in and says,
imagine what it would be like for you to run through this place.
the history of photography is littered with images taken long after the event, pictures that still speak eloquently about what had already happened.
this is a photograph of a bullet-torn, bloodstained shirt, the one worn by the archduke maximilian when he faced a mexican firing squad.
in the immediate aftermath of world war ii, photography's task became horribly simple, to provide undeniable historical proof of nazi atrocities, documenting crime scenes of unimaginable proportions.
but after the war, the tangled relationship between photography and historical truth would become apparent even in a calamity as black-and-white as the holocaust.
this is lodz in poland, the site of an infamous nazi ghetto.
it was here that henryk ross, along with 164,000 other polish jews, was incarcerated for four years until the ghetto was liquidated in 1944.
but ross was a photographer, and he kept a unique record of what really happened here.
the nazis had put the running and policing of the ghetto in jewish hands, a situation that created a system of privilege among its inhabitants.
there were those who had the merest chance of survival... and those who had none.
among his many duties as one of the ghetto's official photographers,
ross had to document the production of goods by the inhabitants of lodz, sold to make money for their captors.
ross was a propaganda photographer at one level.
i mean, he was employed by the department of administration and statistics.
he produced identity card pictures.
he worked within the graphics department that had the responsibility for promoting the goods that were made in the ghetto and which many people would...
would view as a form of collaboration.
this building was the department of administration and statistics, where ross worked.
although he had become a propaganda photographer for his german jailers, he was a photojournalist before the war.
simply by looking out of his office window here, he could see that life for the jews was becoming progressively worse.
he decided to document it.
we're in the apartment of some people whose breakfast we've interrupted.
so this is where the...
the bridge was over the main street.
this is zgierska street, part of the main thoroughfare of lodz, which was known here as aryan street.
and initially when...
i think when the ghetto was set up, jews could cross at leisure, but gradually restrictions came in and...and the bridge was built and at the point that jews couldn't walk on the street at all.
lodz wasn't a death camp but it was a staging post.
most of its inhabitants were eventually deported from here on trains, never to be seen again.
the early deportations were to chelmno, which is in that direction.
that was the death camp that the...the nazis initially set up.
and as they perfected their methods at auschwitz, which is in that direction, that's where the majority of the jews of lodz were ultimately sent.
part of the way ross saw his role, his responsibility, even, as a photographer, was to document what was happening here and he was able one night to smuggle himself in, spent the night in the building to the side here,
documenting one of the deportations, as german troops herded people onto these carriages or carriages like them.
he almost certainly would have been killed, as...as would his family, had he been caught.
this is what remains of the hospital in lodz ghetto, where ross photographed jewish police preventing the sick and elderly from escaping, knowing that they were being rounded up for deportation.
ross obviously enjoyed free movement within the police.
i mean, the jewish police had no problem with him, and it doesn't look from the pictures like they had a problem with him photographing them.
so i don't think he was taking the same degree of risk as he was down at the railway station while people were being deported on trains.
this was him trying to use his camera as a vehicle for recording these important moments.
i mean, the other pictures that he took that he was clear that he was risking his life taking was of the hangings in the ghetto square.
before the liquidation of the ghetto,
ross buried all his negatives in this garden, hoping they might survive even if he didn't.
amazingly, both he and the negatives did, and in 1961 his most incriminating pictures helped hang war criminal adolf eichmann.
but there were other photographs ross had taken that had no place in the courtroom and until recently no place in our image of the holocaust.
as well as his other pictures,
ross had, in an unselfconscious way, photographed the everyday life of the ghetto, including marriages, religious ceremonies, and parties.
in these pictures we see a happy, well-fed jewish elite and scenes that show some uncomfortable truths about the ghetto system, like a little boy dressed up as a lodz policeman in his own ghetto-made uniform, playing a game of "arrest your best playmate".
the battle over this material is partly the argument... partly rests in the argument that nobody...
there was no joy in the ghetto, and these pictures certainly do challenge that.
contrary to any thought that they might complicate the picture of german cruelty, or any question about the extent of the holocaust, they actually give a very, very clear idea of how the german war machine in that period managed the holocaust.
there's something very immediate about photography.
there's something very powerful about these pictures.
you can't look at these pictures without knowing that everyone... or almost everyone in them was killed before the war was over.
photo-historian chris boot recently published a more representative selection of ross's images as well as organising public events to discuss the pictures.
anyone who had survived the ghetto might now see them for the first time.
i was sitting with my daughter and we started seeing these photographs, and suddenly i said, "oh, i knew this person.
another photograph appeared.
i said, "i knew this person.
and we come to the last photograph, and i looked at this photograph and i said, "i knew this person very well,
this man playing the accordion was my boyfriend, my first love,
and...and in the camp.
and suddenly my daughter, who sat next to me, said to me, "but, mummy, you are next to him.
well, i was just...
i was laughing, crying,
i...
i just didn't know how to react.
it...it was amazing.
amazing feeling.
no, there were fun times.
there were concerts.
there were theatres, jewish theatres.
there were hairdressers, there were...
it was a little jewish state.
and hunger, yes.
you...you eat pieces from the wall.
you eat any...anything.
and...and for many years, i didn't want to think about it.
are you glad to see those pictures?
yes, absolutely.
yes.
more than you're upset by them?
more than i'm sad, yes.
i'm...
i'm very pleased to see them.
in japan, the photographic legacy of world war ii proved to be even more indecisive and tangled than in the victorious west.
the physical impact of the war here had been so different that even the simple act of conveying its horrors wasn't easy.
these cities were so crowded and the construction was so flimsy that they dropped almost 100% incendiaries and just burned out the cities.
there is no really stunning photography of japan after the war comparable to the photography of german cities because the german cities always have those masonry and church steeples rising to the sky.
there were still things standing.
but here everything is flat burned out.
there aren't even any bomb craters, and so it's very difficult to photograph.
in two of the most decisive moments in history,
august 6th and august 9th 1945, the americans detonated atomic bombs above the cities of hiroshima and nagasaki.
two flashes killed over 200,000 japanese in an instant.
the american military's photographic records of what remained are extensive.
but unlike photographic records of the holocaust, their pictures completely ignored any evidence of human suffering.
they were interested in physical damage, because their task was to measure,
what is the effect of the bomb 100 metres, 200 metres,
1,000 metres, 8,000 metres from the epicentre?
what the americans turn their cameras away from is the human victims.
this is a surviving copy of the very magazine that finally delivered photographic evidence of the human cost to the japanese, seven years after the event.
japanese photographers had begun taking pictures within hours of the blasts but their images were confiscated by the americans and suppressed until the end of their occupation.
jostling for position next to ads featuring grace kelly lookalikes, these are the images that helped japan begin to view itself not only as the aggressor but also the victim.
but pictures like these were still nowhere to be seen when photography made its most public statement on behalf of humanity only three years later.
photography's big response to a world rapidly moving from hot to cold war was this.
the family 0f man, an exhibition that opened in new york in 1955, comprised of over 500 images, from 273 photographers both amateur and professional.
it was selected from literally millions of images.
five travelling versions toured the world, netting nine million visitors by 1964.
staged as a walk-through version of life magazine, it would be the most popular photographic show of all time, photography's biggest moment.
we'd had 20 or so years of mass-media magazines.
it's just at the dawning of television.
so in many ways it's a last statement about photography as the defining mass medium of the age.
that statement is still standing over 50 years later inside this fairytale-like castle in clervaux, luxembourg.
the exact same prints, carefully orchestrated to preach the exact same humanistic message,
we're all the same underneath", can still be seen in all its timeless naive wonder.
0r you can buy the book, which has never been out of print.
there is a sense of the audience for the show being encouraged into a kind of dream state, something rather removed, actually, from social realities.
although the pictures all come from social realities, they're brought together to make this slightly abstract tone poem about what it is to be human.
we all live, we all die, we all laugh, we all cry, sometimes we go to war, avoids the real historical and political and economic and ideological factors that affect everybody's lives, and prevents them from being a family of man.
the show was a sticking plaster for the wounds of war.
but it represented everything photojournalism's deity henri cartier-bresson stood for.
he had several images in the exhibition.
but the younger generation of photographers like robert frank were against having their pictures used to prop up nothing more than well-intentioned propaganda.
what the show suppresses, if you like, is the individual view of the photographer.
you'd get the impression, going around the show, that all the photographers felt the same, that the photographers were themselves a family of man, and this is just not true.
the exhibition still concludes with an optimistic cliché,
w eugene smith's photograph of his own children walking in his own garden out into the light, the beginning of their sentimental journey through life.
smith embraced the show's humanistic message, but the very year it opened, he proved in dramatic fashion that he was firmly outside any photographic family.
in 1947, top photojournalists robert capa, henri cartier-bresson,
george rodger and david seymour, had created the photo agency magnum.
formed as a cooperative, it declared that its photographers would retain their negatives and copyright in their pictures.
smith would join them later and drag an infant magnum to near bankruptcy.
but for now he was a star turn at life magazine.
i first worked with james smith, uh...
i think it was in october 1939.
i was just a young reporter on the life magazine staff.
he wanted to photograph war the way it was.
he...he made pictures which are... you know, in some ways more damning of war than robert capa's pictures.
i mean, he...he made a sea of corpses.
he refused to let life touch his negatives, uh...if he could help it.
i remember ed thompson, the managing editor, saying to me once,
if you want to put smith on that story, you...you do it.
i don't want anything to do with him.
anyway, smith was the most difficult man i ever knew.
smith became america's greatest photo essayist.
but his increasingly obsessive pursuit of the story caused life magazine problems.
for the assignment "country doctor", he stalked his subject for 23 days, ignoring demands from his employers that he return.
in 1955, he quit life, joined magnum, and came here to pittsburgh for his first routine independent assignment, to produce 100 photographs in three weeks to celebrate the city's centenary.
but smith's real plan was much more ambitious.
three weeks turned into a three-year commitment, as he attempted to describe, understand, and better the world he saw around him, with no less than 21,000 photographic moments.
eugene smith loved william faulkner, and he had clips of william faulkner's quotes all over his loft.
and one of the quotes was about thomas wolfe, the writer.
william faulkner said that...
wolfe was trying to put the entire history of the human heart on the head of a pin.
and i think that's what smith was trying to do with his photography.
he really thought that when he finished his pittsburgh project, people were gonna look at it and change their behaviour.
you know, culture was gonna be changed by what he was showing.
when he came here to pittsburgh, he saw nature, this extraordinary geographic environment here, the natural environment, and the heaviest industry america ever had, and immigrants from all over europe were here.
there was destruction and construction.
there was wealth and poverty.
there was these beautiful rivers and it all just came together into this one bundle here in pittsburgh.
he was ready to erupt with a massive photographic project and i really believe that it would have happened no matter where he'd gone, because he quit life magazine in january of 1955, and his mother died in february of 1955.
his relationship with his mother was...
was deep and complex.
she was domineering and she was always telling him how bad he was doing, and how, you know, even when he was world famous, she would write him letters and say, "gene, when are you gonna wake up and do something worthwhile?
smith never "woke up", perhaps because he rarely ever went to sleep, which was hard on his photographic assistants.
i'd be working till three in the morning, and flop out, and, uh...the next morning at ten he's still working.
but he used to use amphetamines.
we didn't know that word then.
it was called dexedrine, which even my sisters used to use to lose weight.
i...
i never thought of it as speed.
smith took amphetamines constantly, like...
like dozens of pills every day.
they were for the purpose of keeping him awake, so he could accomplish more work.
he was addicted to his work, and in his life there's not a lot of evidence that he did much else besides work.
but he was also addicted to alcohol, and he would go in these cycles of up and down, and harold told me that, uh...
he was joking but he said they used to drink ferrous cyanide, acid that they used to bleach their prints to increase the contrast between light and dark colours, and harold said they used to drink the stuff.
with the original assignment long lost,
smith now began draining magnum's meagre coffers.
spiralling into bankruptcy and professional suicide, he eventually chose 2,000 core images of pittsburgh selected from 7,000 prints that had been painstakingly crafted.
i always sensed the demon was his mother.
but the problem...the reason he was crazy is he cared.
i was a master printer at the time so i could do some of his printing, and his printing was extraordinary.
he had a sense of...
of darkening and lightening.
he used to use ferrous cyanide, which could accentuate the lighting in certain areas of the print.
he cared about the details.
he cared about the whole thing.
at that point, the photographer was someone you sent out to point a camera to take a picture of that and that and that.
w eugene smith's photo essay of pittsburgh was never sold.
his magnum opus ended up pinned to bulletin boards all around his loft.
the world he wanted to change never saw it.
i was unpublishable.
it really was.
it was unpublishable from the start.
and there was no way to publish 2,000 photographs in a book.
there was no way to exhibit them anywhere.
that's one of the mysteries of this story of smith and why did he care so much about his work.
and i think it's the same question you ask about, you know, prophets,
old testament prophets.
why did they care so much?
and smith certainly saw himself in that light.
i mean, he really believed that there was a truth that he could find, and i don't think that people believe that today.
smith's pittsburgh project suggested that decisive moments, even in their thousands, were not enough to get to the bottom of the american postwar experience.
for japanese photographers, the legacy of the past and the political complexities of the present were even harder to unravel.
america had continued to use the pacific as a nuclear test site throughout the early '50s and the japanese had once again suffered casualties.
as part of a growing anti-nuclear movement in japan, in the early '60s photographers returned to hiroshima and nagasaki, for the first time since 1945.
tomatsu went down to nagasaki and did some of the really, really iconic photographs that we now associate with nagasaki.
shomei tomatsu has become one of japan's greatest photographers.
but in 1961 he was just a kid on an assignment.
sixteen years after the event, there would be no d-day photo opportunity in nagasaki and no place for a traditional war photographer.
i saw for the first time how these people had been living for 16 years.
over that time, nagasaki had turned into an exotic place, like naples.
and for the most part, there was no evidence of what had happened.
bomb victims found it embarrassing to go out in public, so they didn't go out much at all, and a lot of them would avoid any form of eye contact with other people.
even after 16 years, those around them, especially children, didn't know they were bomb victims.
when they got on the buses, for example, children would shout, "there's a ghost!
even though they were all living together, these people were forgotten in their own communities.
the culture shock was so great, i couldn't process my feelings while i was working.
later, when it wasn't my job any more, for many years i went back.
and every time i returned, i got to know the people i photographed even more.
tomatsu didn't only photograph those who carried the terrible and psychological effects of the blast, but other kinds of scars.
shattered christian statues, broken statues that had been blackened and charred, very powerful.
a very simple item suddenly becomes awesome, like a pocket watch that suddenly stopped at the time the bomb fell.
or a bottle that has been twisted into some... almost like a grotesque deformed human foetus, you know, and it's the notion that the world we cherish, which is a world of ordinary objects, and everyday things,
no longer exists.
tomatsu's images are, in some respects, a return to the valley 0f the shadow 0f death.
they question the very necessity to be present during the action, a red rag to the classic war photographer.
the great thing about photography is, unlike almost all the other art forms, is to practise, you have to be there.
and as the great master cartier-bresson says, as you discover the external world, you discover more about the internal world, and it's an upward spiral, and in the end you become eloquent at telling and seeing and understanding,
and your pictures are great for that reason.
given the choice, you're always there before it happens.
next choice is when it happens and third choice is when it's all over.
and the problem often is that once the circus has left town, it's a pretty boring town.
i think the days of that kind of classic photojournalist, you know, the kind of testosterone-driven, main kind of macho guy, out at the front line, is over.
watching somebody, you know, falling backwards, dying from a bullet, what is that telling us?
you know, we kind of learn to accept this notion that war is inevitable and these are kind of ritual punctuations that we're gonna see every day when we open up the newspaper.
photographs have become important in a different way.
the medium has, by its nature, become a more reflective look at things.
generally, photographers arrive in places after the event now, rather than at the event.
during a real event, you have tv crews up at the front.
then the photographers come in and make something more...more of an analysis, perhaps.
this is a good example of how we would approach the theme or the subject of suicide, a suicide bomb, rather than showing blood, blood, pools of blood on the street minutes after it's happened.
i think there's something more sinister and more unnerving about these images, which are recreations of real suicide bombs that palestinians have built, and disguised as...as everyday objects, as a watermelon, you can see.
broomberg and chanarin's photographs are, like the image of a stopped watch or a twisted bottle, pictures of the relics of war.
photographs of seemingly innocent, everyday objects made chilling by what they speak of, not what they show.
but what happens when warfare becomes invisible?
the 0uter hebrides.
no bullets flying.
no bombs exploding.
modern conflict at its most covert.
a challenge for photographer simon norfolk.
these waters off the coast of these islands, between the outer hebrides and scotland, are the largest submarine exercise area in europe.
this airspace is the biggest low-flying training zone in europe.
this island here has the biggest...
i think it's the biggest in the world, testing range where you can fire missiles.
the fact that you can't see the troposphere, you can't see the submarines, and you can't see the ionosphere, and you can't see the radar systems,
i think just makes it more interesting to me, really.
i wanted to talk about this particular submarine exercise area.
the light was gorgeous.
i found that the colour was great.
and the presence of the salmon nets in the water is slightly odd, strange, slightly surreal.
and also politically very interesting, because i was looking at the right thing.
so it felt like several units just started to stack up.
so you...you get a feeling about things.
all the interesting stuff that happens in war is happening in these spheres.
the money is not being built on spending a new battle tank.
moving men around in little metal boxes round a desert is totally 1980s.
heroism's changed.
war has changed.
but photojournalism is still stuck in the 1940s.
my argument is that even if not a single picture is ever published, they exist, and that means that we are recording the history of the human race.
if that's all you're doing, it's still a very, very worthwhile profession to be involved in.
whatever the arguments about photography and how it deals with history, when you are in the right place at the right time, it's a question of shoot first and ask questions later.
this is ground zero in new york.
today, anyone can take their own pictures of where the twin towers once stood.
but on the day, photographer joel meyerowitz discovered this wasn't so easy.
i did something i've done my entire life.
i picked up my leica.
and as i put it to my eye, someone behind me punched me on my shoulder.
i turn around and it's a black woman cop.
and she says, "no photographs, buddy.
this is a crime scene.
and i said, "what are you talking about, lady?
i said, "this is a street.
this is a public thoroughfare.
she said, "i told you, no photography allowed.
i mean, i thought, "whoa!
if there's no photographs, then there's no history.
i thought, "fuck them.
i'm gonna get in there and i'm gonna make these pictures.
we need a record.
meyerowitz spent eight months on this site with a large format camera, photographing the aftermath,
access that even television couldn't secure.
it was moving under my feet the entire time.
shaking.
could hardly use the tripod most of the times, it was so shaky.
ask jon snow.
what i liked about joel was that if you turned up there to meet him at ground zero, you had to, of course, pretend you were part of his staff.
he doesn't have any staff.
it was as if he was part of the operation.
he had this huge camera, huge old wooden and brass thing.
wood and photographs?
do they still do that?
well, yes, at scenes of crime they do.
i photographed the entire thing in colour, because... to photograph it in black-and-white would be to keep it as a tragedy.
because there's a tragic element to photographing... in this case not war, but the collapse, right?
it was just destruction.
the incident was so immediate, and so catastrophic and on such a scale, that it was very, very difficult on the day to grasp the enormity of it.
it was only the aftermath, wandering through the rubble, that began to cut through that and you began just to think about the life that had gone on where you were standing.
you see, i don't know whether we think in moving images or whether we think in still images.
i...
i have a suspicion that on our hard drive are a series within our brains of still photographs of very important moments in our lives, be they domestic or international, be they of the family, of birth, of death,
but we think in terms of still images, and what the photographer is doing is making direct contact with the human hard drive and recording for all time a sense of what happened.
what happened at the ghetto in lodz is, thanks to photography, now at least visibly clearer.
henryk ross's pictures certainly helped helen aronson come to terms with her own experiences.
when finally published, they also led her to another ghetto survivor, her first love.
and that's him as he is now.
he's 89.
and, of course, we just...
reminiscence how it used to be.
and this is me with him and the book.
talking about photographs.
this is something very personal.
i have nothing from my childhood and so on, but the only thing that survived with me all the war were pictures of my sister.
they were the only things that i kept.
nothing else.
so when people ask me, "if you had to leave your home,
what is the most important things you would take?"...
pictures.
if there's no photographs, then there's no history.
he really believed that there was a truth that he could find.
so it's a game of pounce.
the reason he was crazy is he cared.
god is with us.
people believe pictures.
"no photographs, buddy.
this is a crime scene.
"..trusting the photograph...
__file_terminal__
photography today looks like this...
but it also looks like this...
and this...
this programme contains some strong language.
and of course it looks like this too.
80 billion photographic images will be taken this year alone.
lot number six.
photography also looks like this.
one million.
an object of desire for dealers, collectors and hedge fund managers.
at 2,400,000.
today, photography is not only worth bidding for, it's worth fighting for.
cynical, voyeuristic, exploitative.
all these were the words that i heard.
and it's also worth faking for.
i was told that it was one of two prints.
then there was another, then there was another one.
and they all looked the same.
this is a snapshot of photography in the digital age.
diverse, ubiquitous, valuable and technologically advanced.
but like any good snapshot, there's more going on here than meets the eye.
the medium has never been more widely appreciated or more eagerly exploited.
but what does it mean to be a photographer today?
and what is a photograph really worth these days?
into the garbage.
on main street in pittsfield, massachusetts, lights are being rigged, props are being positioned and the talent are taking their places.
let's get...
let's get larry.
let's get larry in the car.
ok, clear frame.
we got lights inside the car, we can still...
it looks like a movie, sounds like a movie and smells like a movie.
but it isn't.
all of this activity is to make a single photograph by gregory crewdson.
neil, i'm ready for...
i work with a production crew that all come out of film.
we work with cinematic lighting.
but we're only after creating one single and perfect moment.
not...not the car track.
try to clear all those tracks, as much of those as you can.
crewdson even has his own director of photography and his own camera operator.
position.
and hold.
relax.
'i do have a strangely disconnected relationship to photography.'
i don't even like holding a camera.
i don't...take the actual picture.
'what i'm truly interested in is images, 'and then the camera is just a necessary instrument.'
smack right in the middle of his side of the street.
over an 11 day shoot, in a variety of locations, crewdson's team will make a series of multiple exposures which will be digitally combined to make six final images.
he'll produce an edition of six prints of each image priced at approximately $60,000.
there's already a list of prospective buyers.
let's get everyone in position.
and hold.
with his striking tableau which combine hollywood production values with suburbia's bad dreams, crewdson has become a hot property.
confident that he has an audience who will appreciate and, if they can afford it, buy his work.
one second.
this is exactly what it should be.
this is the picture.
let's just really make sure we fucking get it.
hold.
final exposure.
that is a wrap.
fantastic job everyone.
perfect photograph.
for crewdson, the business and benefits of being a photographer feel very different from the experience of earlier generations.
robert adams, the highly respected photographer who first came to prominence in the early '70s, had to contend with very different realities with only his wife on his team.
it's good that people can earn enough money to free their own time and have their own... years when they have full energy to work and explore what's been given to them.
but kerstin and i lived most of our working life on her income as a librarian, and together we were earning something like the salary of a beginning bus driver.
and we never went hungry, we were never scared, but many is the time that i worried a lot and sleepless nights about whether i could afford to buy the equipment i needed, which is tedious.
the photography world was a different place then, and it had few friends in high places.
i tried to call the new york times and get our exhibitions listed in the art calendar.
and the woman from the new york times, and this would be late '71 told me that, the direct quote is "we don't list photography.
photography is not an art.
but something happened that opened up the field where things were just happening and it was like a garden blooming, there were things all over.
the change, which began in america, but would ultimately spread to the rest of the world, began when photo-literate teenagers graduated from buying reproductions of their favourite photographs, to collecting the real thing.
i'm a baby boomer, i'm 53 years old.
i grew up looking at the picture magazines, learning about the world we live in from looking at photographs.
and the fact that the people who love it because they grew up with it, coming of age, helped people understand that photography's something interesting to look at.
and then it's a lot of fun to be a collector.
by the late '70s, baby boom enthusiasm had brought the market of photography into the mainstream, and prices rose accordingly.
photographers like william klein who made their names decades before the market boom found prints they'd made for reproductions in books and magazines, now treated with a strange, new reverence.
if i gave a photograph to somebody, they would either fold it up and put it a drawer, or put it on the wall with thumb tacks and so on.
and now people put on white gloves and use two hands, and they go for a lot of money.
you know it's like russian bonds that you paper your toilet with, and suddenly people decide they're going to redeem these bonds and they're worth money.
does that make you feel good?
make me feel good?
it amazes me.
at 21,000, 22,000.
bidding at 22,000.
we have pushed the prices of photographs, at auction, up and up and up.
but along with auction house respectability has come a new scale of values for assessing the worth of a photograph.
prints that command the highest price tags are usually the ones that were made by the photographer himself, closest to the time the picture was actually taken.
like fine wines, these prints are known as vintage.
so what i just took off the wall here is a print made in the mid-1940s of this signature image of ansel adams.
but, in fact, the negative was made nearly 20 years earlier, and this is one of the first prints that he made in 1927.
so this is a true vintage print that adams made of the monolith in 1927.
this is all blocked up here.
it's all about huge amounts of areas of dark, whereas here he striates the dark with the snow.
and all that is, of course, differences that are done in the dark room.
i'm not actually sure which i like better.
i probably, in this case, in fact, prefer the later print.
but as mattis knows, his preferred print's monetary value is two-thirds that of its older sibling.
ever since henry fox talbot discovered how to produce prints from a single negative, infinite reproducibility has been a unique feature of photography's genius and key to its astonishing rapid rise to prominence.
but for dealers and collectors, photography's greatest strength remains its biggest problem.
when it comes to a photograph less, as far as the market is concerned, is more.
it used to be that in the '70s and '80s when the photography market was just getting started, there was no such thing as editions.
it didn't exist.
ansel adams did not have editions.
somebody came to ansel adams and said
why don't we put a cap on this of 100, and we can ask more money for it." it's a marketing thing.
dealers have had their work cut out trying to make photographs behave like works of art.
but the medium is inherently promiscuous, as the market was rudely reminded in 1999.
in the early 20th century, lewis hine used his photography to fight for social change and to celebrate the dignity of labour.
but 50 years after his death,
hine's prints had become highly collectable art works.
peter macgill bought a print of the powerhouse mechanic.
i bought one.
i was told that it was one of two prints.
and it was beautiful.
it was big.
it was warm-toned.
it was signed on the back.
it was stamped on the back.
all the things that we thought were important, were there in place.
then there was another one.
and they all looked the same.
collector michael mattis had also bought the powerhouse mechanic.
but as a theoretical physicist, he was confident that science could get to the bottom of this sudden glut of hines.
i thought it might be a weekend's work to conclusively date a sheet of photographic paper.
but we had to develop all sorts of new dating criteria which are now commonly in use in the photography world.
some we borrowed from the fbi, these were forensic techniques used, for example, to debunk the infamous hitler diaries.
so it turned out that there are certain kinds of chemicals called obas, or optical brightening agents, which were put into photographic paper only starting in 1955.
and, in fact, the hines were chock full of obas, and hine died in 1940.
confronted with the evidence, hine's former dark room assistant, walter rosenblum, finally admitted to turning out the prints to profit from the market demand.
rosenblum was a master printer.
the prints he made were the finest quality struck directly from the negatives hine had exposed over 50 years before.
but the market was not impressed.
a fake is a fake.
if it's a baseball card, a painting or a photograph, they're not correct.
that history is important.
and now, i have to show a very specific line of provenance.
the picture started in the photographer's hands and went dut dut dut dut, and if there's a blank there, i have to represent it as a blank.
so when a rare vintage print with a perfect pedigree, crafted by the photographer himself, is united with a stunning image, the market gets excited.
that's what happened in 2006 when sotheby's auctioned
edward steichen's 1904 masterpiece, the pond
moonlight.
this elaborate print is one of only three that steichen made.
it may not be a one-off, like the mona lisa, but for a photograph, it's pretty close.
lot number 6, edward steichen,
the pond
moonlight.
one million.
1,100,000.
1,200,000.
i've never sold anything for over a million dollars before.
1,500,000.
not many people who do photo auctions have.
1,800,000.
i thought in my own mind, what am i gonna do when i get to a million?
1,900,000.
but in the back of my mind, i'd also asked myself what am i gonna do if it goes to two million?
at 2,400,000.
i want everybody to think hard.
i was completely relaxed and having a great time and was able to wait and just let it happen.
at 2,600,000 up front.
bidding at 2,600,000.
at 2,600,000, are we all done?
last call.
going once, and twice.
for 2,600,000.
thank you. 2,600,000.
the pond
moonlight is to date the most expensive photograph ever sold.
inevitably, the market has changed what it is to be a successful photographer in ways great and small.
releasing a new body of work demands a whole lot more thought than in the days when william klein casually handed out his prints.
i've got one little spot that's...
this is alec soth, a rising star in documentary photography.
his latest series is devoted to niagara falls and the people who are drawn there.
what number was that falls?
02.
misty is...for gagosian 2430.
today he's at his lab approving prints before they're despatched to his gallery and individual collectors.
i think we're good to go on this one.
when i made the niagara work, i was thinking about sad love songs.
the whole project after a while was a sad love song.
and there's something really sensual about a sad love song.
it's like taking a bath.
but when it comes to protecting the market value of his prints,
soth can't afford to be sentimental.
wouldn't you know it?
there's a big one.
it's too big.
that wasn't the size that...
i mean, it doesn't look bad, right?
but it's too big.
although technically perfect, the rogue print is now too valuable to survive.
i've heard of people grabbing prints from the garbage from other labs, making copies and selling them on the streets, which is pretty scary.
so i always cut whatever is rejected in front of the client, just so he knows that it's going straight into...the garbage.
nowadays great photographs are not only worth stealing, they're also worth fighting over.
in october 1997, the gagosian art gallery in new york introduced a new photographer to its fashionable clientele.
manhattan was a long way from bamako in mali, where in the 1950s and early '60s
seydou keita served a different kind of market.
by the '90s, he was long retired.
but in his day, he'd been a studio photographer of national renown.
seydou keita was the place to go if you wanted a beautiful image of yourself.
that was the studio to go for the local bourgeoisie and even for the middle class who wanted to grow in the social level.
keita's studio had a ready supply of desirable props for clients to pose with, as if they were their own.
translation from french:
bicycles, mopeds, cars, the props went from small to medium to large.
vespas were average, but a car was a luxury.
and he didn't just stop at one, he had lots.
so people thought he was well off.
and for the time, he was.
translation from french:
for me, and for many others, the iconic photograph by seydou keita is this one.
seydou keita didn't know anything about the paintings of ingres,
manet or anyone else, but you see how he positions this woman, like the odalisque.
this is an absolute masterpiece.
she came with her blankets to show that she owned lots of them, you had to see it.
seydou keita would have remained a strictly local hero if three of his photographs hadn't turned up in a show of african art in new york in 1991.
the pictures were attributed to the world's most prolific photographer
unknown.
on seeing the exhibition, andre magnin, a parisian curator, set off for mali immediately with photocopies from the catalogue as his only lead.
by asking around, he managed to track the "unknown" photographer down.
translation from french:
so i went to seydou keita and introduced myself.
and i showed him the photocopies and he said, "they're mine.
he was astounded that someone would come so far for this.
so i explained to him we were putting together a collection and were interested, amongst other things, in photography.
magnin left mali trusted with some of keita's negatives, hoping to find a new audience for his work in the west.
i talked to keita many times, many times about having a contract and he told me,
andre, i will be with you until my death.
the word of an old man is stronger than a contract.
with magnin as a guide around the art market,
keita's photographs, some now blown up to 80 times their original size, migrated from the living room walls of bamako to the gallery walls of the cartier foundation in paris, and the gagosian in new york.
there were 2,000 people at that opening at the gagosian.
it was a huge success.
everybody was there and knocked out by those photographs.
and they congratulated keita on his work and keita was extremely proud.
he was also becoming extremely rich.
his photographs were now selling for up to $16,000 a piece.
he was even commissioned to shoot a fashion story for top american style magazine harper's bazaar.
but as keita's value soared, he attracted the interest of a professional dealer.
i was consultant for a website in the uk, so they sent me to bamako in order to sign photographers.
and i met seydou and he proposed me to be his agent.
i said, "well, you know, you already have people who you work with.
and he said, "no, you know, it's...
i said, "i would love to do it, but i sign contracts with my artists,
and he said, "ok, write your contract and come back.
and that's what i did and he...
i became his agent until he died.
keita's death in 2001 sparked a major dispute between patras and magnin.
it turned on the custody of 921 of keita's precious negatives.
both claim the support of keita's heirs, and insist they're carrying out the photographer's wishes.
and suddenly the battle started for the happiness of lawyers, like me, and for the happiness of the market, because it made the value of seydou keita increasing.
for now, there is a legal stalemate, until a court decides on who has control over the 921 negatives, on which future sales of keita's work depend.
nearly 1,000 negatives are missing and this has been really difficult for us to develop seydou keita and give seydou keita to the world.
translation from french:
i've seen it done before, you can make some prints out of photographs, as you see here, really well done.
but they're fake.
you need the negatives.
i'm thinking that this battle and this litigation will go on for years and years and years.
but what i can see is that seydou keita is now a great value in the market of the photography.
the meeting in mali between photography and the market led to the courts.
but in china, it's thrown up issues of another sort.
in this crucible of modernity, photography and the market have embraced each other with the same eagerness as the chinese took to mcdonalds.
but theirs is a complex relationship.
for western photographers, like the canadian ed burtynsky,
china's transformation from sleeping giant into industrial superpower provides subject matter for thought-provoking, awe-inspiring panoramas.
but for native-born photographers, tackling the same issues is complicated by ghosts of the not-so-distant past.
until relatively recently, photography in china was heavily restricted and used almost exclusively as propaganda.
li zhensheng was a red army news soldier, a photo-journalist, who in the 1960s and early '70s found himself covering the cultural revolution.
translation from chinese:
this is the red soldier's dance.
it echoes the government's slogan, "it is right to rebel.
this gesture means, "beat the capitalists down to the ground.
but in the fever of revolution, the photo-journalist's ideal of being in the right place at the right time could easily become a case of wrong place, wrong time.
in the cultural revolution, it was very chaotic.
one day, you could be a star and the next day you'd be denounced.
so i tried to take care of my pictures and not let anyone find them.
if they found them, they'd have been burnt and i'd have lost all my negatives.
so i hid them in order to protect myself.
today it's possible for li's photographs to see the light of day.
but not in china.
in new york, they're being promoted by a top agency, desirable products to be sold alongside the work of celebrity photographers like annie leibowitz.
the capitalists may have been beaten to the ground but now they've returned.
he sings in chinese:
he laughs
for the younger generation, photography is the perfect medium for exploring the strange no man's land that lies between what china once was and what it is becoming.
in london, one of china's hottest photographers,
wang qingsong is having his first solo show in the united kingdom.
though it's rooted in the dilemmas of modern china,
wang's work has found its most appreciative audience a long way from the streets of beijing.
tramp is gonna be the centrepiece of jeff's new office.
so a lot of people from all over the world will see it.
speaks in chinese
he thinks he has been like an outsider in the big city.
so he himself is a tramp inside this big city.
we're thinking to have this image for the venice biennale...
but as wang has realised, even work that tries to address the black comedy of the global market still has to play by the market's rules.
the only problem is i like to buy everything.
translation:
i discovered there was a danger as the market opens up.
today the man buys my work, tomorrow he sells it to the auction house.
it's like he's gambling on my work.
he doesn't really like it at all.
so i began to halve my output and refuse to sell to anyone who doesn't really appreciate my work.
this speculation is harmful to art works so i'm going to carry on reducing my production.
this is how i protect my work and forge a better future.
one photographer who would have understood wang's desire for a better future was edward steichen.
he may have created the world's most expensive photograph, the pond
moonlight, but at the time he was an art-for-art's-sake artist who got very little for his pains except the odd murmur of appreciation.
it was only later, in the 1920s, he realised he wanted to make photography pay, and so re-establish the link between photography and money which had been one of the medium's founding principles.
it wasn't just about money.
but, on the other hand, steichen felt there was no reason why talented photographers should starve.
there is an argument that's been going on for years, does art have to be pure and only made for the beauty of the picture, or is it all right to be paid for something that sells products?
and, of course... when steichen started that, doing that kind of work in the 1920s,
alfred stieglitz, who was his great friend and promoter, was horrified.
stieglitz had a very precious kind of sensibility and also, he never had to earn a living.
steichen not only had to earn a living, but he was curious about other uses for photography, and about the potential for reaching people.
and when he made a wonderful photograph, it could be advertising, it could be paid for for fashion or whatever, but it was a wonderful photograph and it was a piece of art.
bolstered by contracts from publisher conde nast and ad agency j walter thompson,
steichen was defiant about his commercial work.
while stieglitz bragged about photographing old wagon horses and poor devils,
steichen lavished photographic adulation on lighters, cutlery, shoes and lots and lots of hand cream.
it's a measure of how far photography has come that the battle between steichen and stieglitz over photography's commercial instincts seems as distant as photographs of the cultural revolution.
now you can be a fashion photographer and, at the same time, an art photographer.
you can jump from a magazine to a gallery.
and it's something that...
a little bit of sacrilege or... 10 years ago was something like, nobody can do it, you know?
it was two different worlds and it was completely inaccessible.
and it is very interesting, i think this is the big new of photography.
after 10 years as a fashion photographer,
ventura is now enjoying his first new york solo exhibition called war souvenir.
in these arresting, staged photographs, he's exchanged flesh and blood models for plastic ones.
when i first saw them, i thought this is like this lost, forensic evidence from... activity taking place in italy during world war ii.
this unknown, hitherto undiscovered trove of colour photographs of city life during world war ii, which is of course nonsense, these are just fictions.
in a juxtaposition at which few eyelids bat,
ventura's photographs are now displayed in the same gallery as esteemed 1970s photo-journalist, eugene richards.
but while photo-journalism and art co-exist on the neutral territory of a fashionable gallery, photo-journalism's heartland has proved to be more heavily fortified.
policed by men and women armed with their camera and their conscious, photo-journalism remained a bastion of 20th-century photographic values - humanistic, politically engaged, liberal and serious.
in 1994, british photographer martin parr breached this final frontier when he applied to join photo-journalism's super-agency, magnum.
i wanted to join magnum because at heart i'm a populist and i wanted to have this method of getting my work out.
i thought, if i join an agency,
i may as well join the most prestigious agency.
founded as a co-operative in 1947 by legendary photographers, like cartier bresson and robert capa,
magnum had built its reputation on searing images of conflict and suffering in far flung places.
magnum photographers were meant to go out as a crusade, if you like, to places like famine and war and such like.
i went round to the local supermarket, cos this to me is the front line.
parr's territory was very different from the magnum veterans.
the scruffy beaches of new brighton, for instance, packed with working-class holiday makers.
not surprisingly, parr's application brought magnum's old guard to the barricades.
his photographs titillate in some way, but the fact is they are meaningless.
the principle objection would be that i would appear to be cynical, voyeuristic, exploitative.
all these were the words i heard.
i think cartier bresson put it most succinctly when he said,
i don't know who you are, you're from another planet.
to a certain extent, i see what he means and i don't have any problem with this.
he got quite irate.
in a final bid to prevent parr's entry,
jones griffiths circulated an open letter to the entire membership.
his penchant for kicking the victims of tory violence
caused me to describe his pictures as fascistic.
i have great respect for him as a dedicated enemy
of everything i believe in and, i trust, what magnum still believes in.
great stuff, isn't it?
when the members came to the final ballot, parr scraped in by one vote.
i think he certainly heralded a major change in magnum, and it's possible, you know, to get on the magnum website and have to reach for one's anti-nausea pill.
like anything, i think magnum has to change and expand and since i became a member, and the other people who've joined since, have been essential to its creative ongoing survival if you like.
parr had to battle long and hard to bring his distinctive brand of photography into photo-journalism's holy of holies.
by contrast, around the same time, photography was receiving the red carpet treatment in the high temple of fine art.
once, this was a place where photographers barely had squatters' rights.
but in the 1980s, this began to change as a generation of artists started to use photography as readily as they would a palette or an easel.
leading the way was canadian jeff wall, who was among the first to gain international recognition for his large-scale photographic works.
photography was, for a long while, only on the margins of the fine arts, even though i think more perceptive people, from the very beginning, recognised that there was no reason why this technology wouldn't be an art form like any other.
so there's no reason why one can't just be an artist whose medium is photography.
jeff wall didn't reinvent photography, but he took it back to the 19th century, to painting, where everything is creative - the people, the light.
everything is constructed for a meaning.
he fed in a lot of contemporary theoretical concerns.
concerns about gender, about how men and women look at each other.
concerns about racial stereotyping.
i like to think that sometimes my work begins by not photographing, but by seeing something, by being a witness, but not photographing.
i think the act of not photographing is quite important, at least to me.
so i remember it and i later decide that it has the potential to be a picture, a kind of picture i want to make.
but when the time comes for a picture to be made, it's more than the work of a decisive moment.
wall can devote as much time to his photographs as a painter would to his canvas.
one of the women in that picture was hired to make that apartment into her own apartment, and that she had several months to do.
when i asked the one to walk around the corner, you can't really direct a person to walk, you can just say, "walk.
how they look, how they feel, what the feeling is, is something you can never really get by asking for it.
you just have to photograph over and over again until something happens.
so i'll probably photograph that woman 1,000 times.
and only one picture was very good.
though wall's pictures reflect the themes and traditions of painting, his techniques owe a debt to modern advertising.
photographs like this new work, called in front of a nightclub, are produced as gigantic transparencies mounted in light boxes to give the luminosity of an old master, but the impact of a billboard.
i never set out to make big photographs, but the size i use is based upon the way i see.
so i work a lot at life scale.
if you see a figure, a person in a picture at a scale similar to you, when you're looking at it, i think you feel rather close to them or closer to them.
and i always felt that traditional photographs were too small.
it's said that, not so long ago, you could conceal a dozen of the world's greatest photographs inside a folded newspaper.
not any more.
most top art photographers think big.
but the work of andreas gursky probably covers more square metres of gallery wall than anyone else's.
what is a gursky?
well, it has to talk to us about globalisation, it can't just be a landscape.
it has to be a kind of globalised, urbanised, semi-rural, mixed-use landscape.
and it can't just be a panorama.
it has to have kind of layers that conform to certain traditions of pictorial composition.
though trained in the famously precise dusseldorf school of photography,
gursky's breakthrough image was as close as he's come to a snapshot.
this is a photograph, it's made in '86 or '87.
and i travelled to italy alone looking for landscapes combined with civilisation and human beings.
and so i made a couple of photographs and this situation i found by chance, and went with a big 5 x 7 inch camera.
and...then i saw the cable car coming and i didn't know before that the cable car was coming there.
so i had to decide very quickly and just hold it and made one shot and this was the final photograph.
this is completely different to the way i work today.
behind this work stands two years of experience with formula one and i shot lots of pictures, but i don't bring them to the market.
so i keep them in my archive.
but after two and a half years i produced only two works, one in monaco and this one in bahrain.
much of the time has been spent using digital technology to refine and manipulate the image to produce the ideal final photograph.
right now i am really interested in vertical images.
so, for me, this was not enough.
so this curve here was more on the left side and i combined it to the original circuit.
and the same was...
the background was also not exactly in this position.
so i altered.
but i think these are the possibility nowadays working with photography, it's the same like dealing with painting, that in terms of composition it makes sense to combine several details and find the final composition.
gursky and wall are both thoroughly modern artist photographers.
but in staging elaborate set-ups or using the latest technologies, they're following in a tradition that reaches back to the early days of photography.
this seemingly realistic photograph by the french photographer camille silvy offers a masterclass in 19th-century photographic manipulation.
when i first saw the camille silvy river scene, france,
i didn't know anything about it, but i thought it was marvellous.
and then i realised this was the directorial mode in 1858 because i realised that camille silvy arranged where the people should stand, so the working-class people are in the common land on the right of the picture.
the country bourgeoisie are on the private property on the left at the end of their garden, about to go on a boat trip.
we have this artificial sky that he has added.
but more than that, he's done extraordinary things.
in fact, ansel adams was the person who told me the most dastardly thing camille silvy did, which was to introduce a white cloud just above the horizon, where the two bits of the photograph meet, the sort of dead zone.
and he did that so we would read the two as one picture.
he added leaves to the trees, cos he wasn't satisfied that they were lively enough.
and what's really surprised me is that camille silvy, one of the great photographers of the 19th century, didn't even take this photograph himself.
it was taken, we now know, by somebody called francois moutard, frank mustard.
isn't that terrible?
don't worry about your footsteps, i just wanna get rid of that track.
although frank mustard would find much that was strange and wonderful in the world of 21st-century photography, there are some things he would recognise instantly.
position.
and hold.
but the parallels between the 19th century and today go beyond staging and manipulation.
then, photography was too new to be confined by definitions of what it could or couldn't be.
it was anything that photographers wanted it to be, from high art to low commerce.
in the 20th century, definitions and distinctions grew up, confining photography's erratic genius into tightly controlled channels.
in the 21st century, the rigid division of photography into categories, like fashion, advertising, art or documentary, have collapsed.
once again, photography is anything photographers want it to be.
even if that means exchanging the wizardry of today for the magic of the past.
photographer sally mann uses the same wet-plate collodion process that camille silvy did.
in the 21st century, the techniques of the 19th are as readily available as the latest digital technology, so long as you have a steady enough hand.
you pour the collodion on the plate and you have to sort of spread it around very carefully and then drain it off.
it's harder than it looks to actually pour those plates so that you don't get lines and ridges and streaks.
and it has to reach a certain kind of texture before it really works properly.
and when it gets to that feeling, you put it in the silver nitrate.
and when you remove it, the silver nitrate has adhered to the collodion.
at which point, it's sensitive, so you have a fairly short period of time in which to get your picture.
mann has been taking pictures of her family for years.
today she is photographing her husband larry.
you have a fairly short period of time in which to get your picture generally around six minutes, because as it's drying, it's losing sensitivity.
so you put it on your camera, pull out the dark slide and start counting.
i've photographed him for years and years to just document him as a human being.
but also because, you know, he's a lovely male.
so that was how it started.
but coincidentally he was diagnosed with muscular dystrophy and his body was beginning to change, he was losing his muscles in his right arm and his left leg.
so the pictures began to take on a certain poignancy.
it does seem a little peculiar to be regressing rather than stepping into the next century.
i think the pictures that i take are fairly modern, however, so i don't think it matters what the technique i use is.
i think it'll be great to use digital.
i have no problems contemplating that.
it would be fine if i could get the same feeling that i get with collodion, which i'm sure might be possible with some really fancy, you know, programme.
..fire hydrant here is a problem...
meanwhile, in his new york studio, gregory crewdson is pulling out all the digital stops with re-toucher kylie wright.
he's putting the finishing touches to the picture he began weeks before on snowy main street in pittsfield.
this building looks really bright and kind of flat at the same time so we really amped up the contrast and darkened it a lot.
took the fire hydrant out in the final one.
another thing that we do in all the photographs when we're on streets is we work with the electrical company to turn off the street lamps because they're the wrong colour temperature for our film.
and then kylie turns them all back on.
what we're finished with at the end of the day is its own thing.
it's definitely photographic but something that's also something other than a photograph.
what i'm hoping to do is create a world that feels subjective and recognisable.
that's the thing that keeps me engaged.
final exposure.
and that is a wrap.
fantastic job, everyone.
perfect photograph.
last call.
going once... and twice...
thank you.
subtitles by red bee media ltd
e-mail subtitling@bbc.co.uk
__file_terminal__
photography today looks like this.
but it also looks like this.
and this.
and of course it looks like this, too.
80 billion photographic images will be taken this year alone.
lot number six.
photography also looks like this.
one million.
an object of desire for dealers, collectors and hedge-fund managers.
at 2,400,000.
today, photography is not only worth bidding for... it's worth fighting for.
cynical, voyeuristic, exploitative - all these were the words that i heard.
and it's also worth faking for.
i was told that it was one of two prints.
then there was another.
then there was another one.
and they all looked the same.
this is a snapshot of photography in the digital age.
diverse, ubiquitous, valuable and technologically advanced.
but like any good snapshot, there's more going on here than meets the eye.
the medium has never been more widely appreciated or more eagerly exploited.
but what does it mean to be a photographer today?
and what is a photograph really worth these days?
garbage.
just go back and don't... 0n main street in pittsfield, massachusetts, lights are being rigged, props are being positioned and the talent are taking their places.
let's get...
ok, let's get larry...
let's get larry in the car.
ok, clear frame.
we got lights inside the car.
it looks like a movie, sounds like a movie and smells like a movie.
but it isn't.
all of this activity is to make a single photograph... by gregory crewdson.
i work with a production crew that all come out of film.
we work with cinematic lighting.
but we are only after creating one, single, perfect moment.
not the car track.
try to clear all those tracks.
as much of those as you can.
crewdson even has his own director of photography and his own camera operator.
and... hold.
relax.
i do have this strangely disconnected relationship to photography.
i don't even like holding the camera.
erm...
i don't take the actual picture.
what i'm truly interested in is images.
and then the camera is just a necessary instrument.
smack right in the middle of the street.
yeah, a car width.
0ver an 11-day shoot in a variety of locations,
crewdson's team will make a series of multiple exposures which will be digitally combined to make six final images.
he'll produce an edition of six prints of each image, priced at approximately $60,000.
there's already a list of prospective buyers.
let's get everyone in position.
and... hold.
with his striking tableaux, which combine hollywood production values with suburbia's bad dreams,
crewdson has become a hot property, confident that he has an audience who will appreciate and, if they can afford it, buy his work.
the hand goes back.
one second.
this is exactly where it should be.
this is the picture.
let's just really make sure we fucking get it.
hold.
final exposure.
that is a wrap.
fantastic job, everyone.
perfect photograph.
for crewdson, the business and benefits of being a photographer feel very different from the experience of earlier generations.
robert adams, a highly respected photographer who first came to prominence in the early '70s, had to contend with very different realities, with only his wife on his team.
it's good that people can earn enough money to free their own time and have their own years when they have full energy to work and explore what's been given to them.
but kerstin and i lived most of our working life on her income as a librarian, and together we were earning something like the salary of a beginning-bus driver.
we never went hungry, we were never scared, but many is the time that i worried a lot, and sleepless nights about whether i could afford to buy the equipment i needed, which was tedious.
the photography world was a different place then and it had few friends in high places.
i tried to call the new york times and get our exhibitions listed in the art calendar and the woman from the new york times - and this would be late '71 - told me...
the direct quote is, "we don't list photography.
photography is not an art.
but something happened that opened up the field where things were just happening and it was like a garden blooming - there were things all over.
the change, which began in america but would ultimately spread to the rest of the world, began when photo-literate teenagers graduated from buying reproductions of their favourite photographs to collecting the real thing.
i'm a baby-boomer.
i'm 53 years old.
i grew up looking at the picture magazines, learning about the world we live in from looking at photographs.
the fact that people who love it, because they grew up with it, coming of age, helped people understand that photography's interesting to look at... and that it's a lot of fun to be a collector.
by the late '70s, baby-boom enthusiasm had brought the market in photography into the mainstream.
and prices rose accordingly.
photographers like william klein, who made their names decades before the market boom, found prints they had made for reproductions in books and magazines now treated with a strange new reverence.
if i would give a photograph to somebody, they would either fold it up and put it in a drawer or put it on the wall with thumb-tacks and so on.
and now people put on white gloves and use two hands and they go for a lot of money.
you know, it's like a russian bond that you paper your toilet with and suddenly er... people decide that they're going to redeem these bonds and they're worth money.
does that make you feel good?
make me feel good?
it amazes me.
at 21,000, 22,000.
bidding at 22,000.
we have pushed the prices of photographs at auction up and up and up.
but along with auction-house respectability has come a new scale of values for assessing the worth of a photograph.
prints that command the highest price tags are usually the ones that were made by the photographer himself, closest to the time the picture was actually taken.
like fine wines, these prints are known as "vintage".
so, what i just took off the wall here is a print made in the mid-1940s of this signature image of ansel adams.
but in fact, the negative was made nearly 20 years earlier and this is one of the first prints that he made, in 1927.
so this is a true vintage print that adams made of the monolith in 1927.
this is all blocked up here.
it's all about huge amounts of... areas of dark, whereas here he striates the dark with the snow.
and all that is, of course, differences that are done in the darkroom.
i'm not actually sure which i like better.
i probably, in this case, in fact prefer the later print.
but as mattis knows, his preferred print's monetary value is two thirds that of its older sibling.
ever since henry fox talbot discovered how to produce prints from a single negative, infinite reproducibility has been a unique feature of photography's genius and key to its astonishingly rapid rise to prominence.
but for dealers and collectors, photography's greatest strength remains its biggest problem.
when it comes to a photograph, less - as far as the market is concerned - is more.
it used to be that, in the '70s and '80s, when the photography market was just getting started, there was no such thing as editions.
it didn't exist.
ansel adams did not have editions.
somebody came to ansel adams and said,
hey, why don't we put a cap on this of 100 and we can ask more money for it?
it's a marketing thing.
dealers have had their work cut out, trying to make photographs behave like works of art.
but the medium is inherently promiscuous, as the market was rudely reminded in 1999.
in the early 20th century,
lewis hine used his photography to fight for social change and to celebrate the dignity of labour.
but 50 years after his death
hine's prints had become highly collectable artworks.
peter macgill bought a print of the powerhouse mechanic.
i bought one.
i was told that it was one of two prints.
and it was beautiful.
it was big, it was warm-toned, it was signed on the back, it was stamped on the back.
all the things that we thought were important were there, in place.
then there was another one.
and they all looked the same.
collector michael mattis had also bought the powerhouse mechanic.
but as a theoretical physicist, he was confident that science could get to the bottom of this sudden glut of hines.
i thought it might be a weekend's work to conclusively date a sheet of photographic paper.
but it turned out that we had to develop all sorts of new dating criteria, which are now commonly in use in the photography world, some of which we borrowed from the fbi.
these were forensic techniques used, for example, to de-bunk the infamous hitler diaries.
so, it turned out that there are certain kinds of chemicals called obas... or optical brightening agents, which were put into photographic paper, only starting in 1955.
and in fact, the hines were chock-full of obas and hine died in 1940.
confronted with the evidence,
hine's former darkroom assistant, walter rosenblum, finally admitted to turning out the prints to profit from the market demand.
rosenblum was a master printer.
the prints he made were of the finest quality, struck directly from the negatives hine had exposed over 50 years before.
but the market was not impressed.
a fake is a fake if it's a baseball card, a painting or a photograph.
they're... they're not correct.
that history is important and now i have to show a very specific line of provenance.
the picture started in the photographer's hands and went doot doot doot doot and if there's a blank there i have to represent it as a blank.
so when a rare vintage print with a perfect pedigree, crafted by the photographer himself, is united with a stunning image, the market gets excited.
that's what happened in 2006 when sotheby's auctioned edward steichen's 1904 masterpiece,
the pond
moonlight.
this elaborate print is one of only three that steichen made.
it may not be a one-off like the mona lisa but, for a photograph, it's pretty close.
lot number six, edward steichen, the pond
moonlight.
1,000,000.
1,100,000.
1,200,000.
i've never sold anything for over $1 million before.
1,500,000.
not many people who do photo-auctions have.
1,800,000.
i thought in my own mind, "what am i gonna do when i get to a million?
1,900,000.
but in the back of my mind i'd also asked myself,
what am i gonna do if it goes to two million?
at 2,400,000.
i want everybody to think hard.
i was completely relaxed and having a great time and was able to wait and just let it happen.
at 2,600,000 up front.
bidding at 2,600,000.
at 2,600,000, are we all done?
last call.
going once.
and twice.
for 2,600,000.
thank you.
2,600,000.
the pond
moonlight is, to date, the most expensive photograph ever sold.
inevitably, the market has changed what it is to be a successful photographer in ways great and small.
releasing a new body of work demands a whole lot more thought than in the days when william klein casually handed out his prints.
i got one little spot that's...
this is alec soth, a rising star in documentary photography.
his latest series is devoted to niagara falls and the people who are drawn there.
what number was that falls?
02.
misty is for gagosian, 2430.
today he's at his lab, approving prints before they're dispatched to his gallery and individual collectors.
ok, so i think we're good to go on this one.
when i made the niagara work i was thinking about sad love songs.
i was sort of thinking of the whole project, after a while, as a sad love song.
and there's something really sensual... about a sad love song, it's like taking a bath.
but when it comes to protecting the market value of his prints,
soth can't afford to be sentimental.
wouldn't you know it?
then there's a big one.
it's too big.
that wasn't the size that...
i mean, it doesn't look bad, right?
but it's too big.
although technically perfect, the rogue print is now too valuable to survive.
i've heard stories of people just grabbing prints out of the garbage from other labs and making copies and selling them on the streets.
which is pretty scary, so i always cut whatever is rejected in front of the client just so he knows that it's going straight into... the garbage.
nowadays, great photographs are not only worth stealing, they are also worth fighting over.
in 0ctober 1997 the gagosian art gallery in new york introduced a new photographer to its fashionable clientele.
manhattan was a long way from bamako in mali, where in the 1950s and early '60s
seydou keita served a different kind of market.
by the '90s he was long retired but in his day he'd been a studio photographer of national renown.
seydou keita was the place to go if you wanted to have a beautiful image of yourself.
that was the studio to go for the local bourgeoisie and even for the middle class who wanted to grow in the social level.
keita's studio had a ready supply of desirable props for clients to pose with as if they were their own.
la bicyclette, la moto... bicycles, mopeds, cars - the props went from small to medium to large.
vespas were average but a car was a luxury.
and he didn't just stop at one.
he had lots, so people thought he was well off.
and for the time, he was.
pour moi et pour beaucoup... for me and for many others the iconic photograph by seydou keita is this one.
seydou keita didn't know anything about the paintings of ingres or manet or anyone else, but you see how he positions this woman, like the odalisque.
this is an absolute masterpiece.
she came with her blankets to show that she owned lots of them.
you had to see it.
seydou keita would have remained a strictly local hero if three of his photographs hadn't turned up in a show of african art in new york in 1991.
the pictures were attributed to the world's most prolific photographer, unknown.
0n seeing the exhibition, andré magnin, a parisian curator, set off for mali immediately, with photocopies from the catalogue as his only lead.
by asking around, he managed to track the "unknown"photographer down.
so i went to seydou keita and introduced myself and i showed him the photocopies.
and he said, "they're mine,
and he was astounded that someone would come so far for this.
so i explained to him we were putting together a collection and were interested, amongst other things, in photography.
magnin left mali, trusted with some of keita's negatives, hoping to find a new audience for his work in the west.
i talked to keita many times about having a contract, and he told me, "andré, i will be with you until my death.
the word of an old man is stronger than a contract.
with magnin as a guide around the art market,
keita's photographs, some now blown up to 80 times their original size, migrated from the living-room walls of bamako to the gallery walls of the cartier foundation in paris and the gagosian in new york.
there were 2,000 people at that opening at the gagosian.
it was a huge success.
everybody was there and knocked out by those photographs.
and they congratulated keita on his work and keita was extremely proud.
he was also becoming extremely rich.
his photographs were now selling for up to $16,000 apiece.
he was even commissioned to shoot a fashion story for top american style magazine, harper's bazaar.
but as keita's value soared, he attracted the interest of a professional dealer.
i was consultant for a website in the uk so they sent me to bamako in order to sign photographers and i met seydou and he proposed me to be his agent.
i said, "well, you know, it's...
you already have people who you work with,
and he said, "oh, you know, it's er...
and i said, "well, i would love to do it but i sign contracts with my artists,
and he said, "ok, write a contract and come back.
and that's what i did and he...
i became his agent until he died.
keita's death in 2001 sparked a major dispute between patras and magnin.
it turned on the custody of 921 of keita's precious negatives.
both claim the support of keita's heirs and insist they are carrying out the photographer's wishes.
and suddenly the battle started, for the happiness of lawyers like me and for the happiness of the market, because it meant the value of seydou keita increasing.
for now, there is a legal stalemate until a court decides on who has control over the 921 negatives... on which future sales of keita's work depend.
nearly 1,000 negatives are missing and this has been really difficult for us to develop seydou keita and give seydou keita to the world.
j'ai déjà vu... i've seen it done before - you can make some prints out of photographs, as you see here, really well done.
but they're fake.
you need the negatives.
i'm thinking that this battle and this litigation will go on for years and years and years.
but what i can see is that seydou keita is now of great value in the market of the photography.
the meeting in mali between photography and the market led to the courts.
but in china it's thrown up issues of another sort.
in this crucible of modernity, photography and the market have embraced each other with the same eagerness as the chinese have taken to mcdonald's.
but theirs is a complex relationship.
for western photographers like the canadian, ed burtynsky,
china's transformation from sleeping giant into industrial superpower provides subject matter for thought-provoking, awe-inspiring panoramas.
but for native-born photographers, tackling the same issues is complicated by ghosts of the not-so-distant past.
until relatively recently, photography in china was heavily restricted and used almost exclusively as propaganda.
li zhensheng was a red army news soldier, a photojournalist who in the 1960s and early '70s found himself covering the cultural revolution.
this is the red soldiers' dance.
it echoes the government slogan, "it is right to rebel.
this gesture means "beat the capitalists down to the ground.
but in the fever of revolution, the photojournalist's ideal of being in the right place at the right time could easily become a case of wrong place, wrong time.
in the cultural revolution it was very chaotic.
one day you could be a star and the next day you'd be denounced.
so i tried to take care of my pictures and not let anyone find them.
if they found them they'd have been burnt and i'd have lost all my negatives... so i hid them in order to protect myself.
today it's possible for li's photographs to see the light of day, but not in china.
in new york they're being promoted by a top agency, desirable products to be sold alongside the work of celebrity photographers like annie leibovitz.
the capitalists may have been beaten to the ground but now they've returned.
for the younger generation, photography is the perfect medium for exploring the strange no-man's-land that lies between what china once was and what it is becoming.
in london, one of china's hottest photographers, wang qinsong, is having his first solo show in the united kingdom.
though it's rooted in the dilemmas of modern china,
wang's work has found its most appreciative audience a long way from the streets of beijing.
tramp is gonna be the centrepiece of geoff's new office, so a lot of people from all over the world will see it.
he thinks that he has been like an outsider in the big city so he himself is a tramp inside this big city.
we're thinking to have this image for the venice biennale.
but as wang has realised, even work that tries to address the black comedy of the global market still has to play by the market's rules.
the only problem is i like to buy everything.
i discovered there was a danger as the market opens up.
today the man buys my work and tomorrow he sells it to the auction house.
it's like he's gambling on my work, he doesn't really like it at all.
so i began to halve my output and refuse to sell to anyone who doesn't really appreciate my work.
this speculation is harmful to artworks so i'm going to carry on reducing my production.
this is how i protect my work and forge a better future.
0ne photographer who would have understood
wang's desire for a better future was edward steichen.
he may have created the world's most expensive photograph,
the pond
moonlight, but at the time he was an art-for-art's-sake artist who got very little for his pains except the odd murmur of appreciation.
it was only later, in the 1920s, he realised he wanted to make photography pay, and so re-established the link between photography and money which had been one of the medium's founding principles.
it wasn't just about money but, on the other hand, steichen felt there was no reason why talented photographers should starve.
there is an argument that's been going on for years - does art have to be pure and only made for the sake of the beauty of the picture or is it all right to be paid for something that sells products?
and of course, when steichen started doing that kind of work in the 1920s,
alfred stieglitz, who was his great friend and promoter, was horrified.
stieglitz had a very precious kind of sensibility and also he never had to earn a living.
steichen not only had to earn a living but he was curious about other uses for photography and about the potential for reaching people.
and when he made a wonderful photograph it could be advertising, it could be paid for for fashion or whatever, but it was a wonderful photograph and it was a piece of art.
bolstered by contracts from publisher condé nast and ad agency j walter thompson,
steichen was defiant about his commercial work.
while stieglitz bragged about photographing old wagon-horses and poor devils,
steichen lavished photographic adulation on lighters, cutlery, shoes and lots and lots of hand cream.
it's a measure of how far photography has come that the battle between steichen and stieglitz over photography's commercial instincts seems as distant as photographs of the cultural revolution.
now you can be a professional photographer and at the same time you can be an art photographer.
you can jump from a magazine to a gallery and it's something that a little bit of sacrilege or...
ten years ago was something like nobody can do it, you know.
it was two different worlds and there was completely unaccessible.
and is very interesting.
i think this is a big new of the photography.
after ten years as a fashion photographer,
ventura is now enjoying his first new york solo exhibition, called war souvenir.
in these arresting, staged photographs, he's exchanged flesh-and-blood models for plastic ones.
when i first saw them i thought this is like this lost forensic evidence from activity taking place in italy during world war ii.
this unknown, hitherto undiscovered trove of colour photographs of city life during world war ii, which is of course nonsense - these are just fictions.
in a juxtaposition at which few eyelids bat,
ventura's photographs are now displayed in the same gallery as esteemed 1970s photojournalist, eugene richards.
but while photojournalism and art co-exist on the neutral territory of a fashionable gallery, photojournalism's heartland has proved to be more heavily fortified.
policed by men and women armed with their camera and their conscience, photojournalism remained a bastion of 20th-century photographic values - humanistic, politically engaged, liberal and serious.
in 1994 british photographer, martin parr, breached this final frontier when he applied to join photojournalism's super-agency, magnum.
i wanted to join magnum because at heart i'm a populist and i wanted to have this method of getting my work out.
and i thought, "if i join an agency i may as well join the most prestigious agency.
founded as a co-operative in 1947 by legendary photographers like cartier-bresson and robert capa,
magnum had built its reputation on searing images of conflict and suffering in far-flung places.
magnum photographers were meant to go out as a crusade, if you like, to places like famine and war and suchlike.
i went out and went round the corner to the local supermarket cos this, to me, is the front line.
parr's territory was very different from the magnum veterans' - the scruffy beaches of new brighton, for instance, packed with working-class holidaymakers.
not surprisingly, parr's application brought magnum's old guard to the barricades.
anyone who was described as margaret thatcher's favourite photographer certainly didn't belong in magnum.
his photographs titillate in some way but the fact is they are meaningless.
the principle objection would be that i would appear to be cynical, voyeuristic, exploitative.
all these were the words that i heard.
well, i think cartier-bresson put it most succinctly when he said, "i don't know who you are.
you're from another planet.
to a certain extent i see what he means and i don't have any problem with this.
and he got quite irate.
in a final bid to prevent parr's entry,
jones griffiths circulated an open letter to the entire membership.
"his penchant for kicking the victims of tory violence
caused me to describe his pictures as fascistic.
let me state that i have great respect for him as a dedicated enemy
of everything i believe in and, i trust, what magnum still believes in.
great stuff, isn't it?
when the members came to the final ballot,
parr scraped in by one vote.
i think he certainly heralded a major change in magnum.
and it's possible, you know, to get on the magnum website and have to reach for one's anti-nausea pill.
like anything, i think, magnum has to change, magnum has to expand, and since i became a member and the other people who've joined since have been essential to its creative, ongoing survival, if you like.
parr had to battle long and hard to bring his distinctive brand of photography into photojournalism's holy of holies.
by contrast, around the same time, photography was receiving the red-carpet treatment in the high temple of fine art.
0nce, this was a place where photographers barely had squatter's rights.
but in the 1980s this began to change, as a generation of artists started to use photography as readily as they would a palette or an easel.
leading the way was canadian, jeff wall, who was among the first to gain international recognition for his large-scale photographic works.
photography was, for a long while, sort of only on the margins of the fine arts even though, i think, more perceptive people from the very beginning recognised that there was no reason why this technology wouldn't be an artform like any other.
so there's no reason why one can't just be an artist whose medium is photography.
jeff wall didn't re-invent photography but he took photography back to the 19th century to painting, where everything is created - the people, the light.
everything is kind of constructed for a meaning.
but he sort of fed in a lot of kind of contemporary theoretical concerns - concerns about gender, about how men and women look at each other, concerns about racial stereotyping.
i like to think that sometimes my work begins by not photographing - that is, by seeing something, by being a witness but not photographing it.
i think the act of not photographing is quite important.
at least, it is to me.
so i remember it and i later decide that it has the potential to be a picture, the kind of picture i want to make.
but when the time comes for a picture to be made, it's more than the work of a decisive moment.
wall can devote as much time to his photographs as a painter would to his canvas.
one of the women in that picture was hired to make that apartment into her own apartment and that she had several months to do.
when i asked the one to walk around the corner, you can't really direct a person to walk - you can just say, "walk.
how they look, how they feel, what the feeling is, is something that you can never really get by asking for it.
you just have to photograph over and over and over again until something happens.
so i'll probably photograph that woman a thousand times.
and only one picture was very good.
though wall's pictures reflect the themes and traditions of painting, his techniques owe a debt to modern advertising.
photographs like this new work called in front 0f a nightclub are produced as gigantic transparencies mounted in light-boxes to give the luminosity of an 0ld master but the impact of a billboard.
i never set out to make big photographs.
but the size that i use is based upon the way i see, so i work a lot at life-scale.
if you see another figure of a person in a picture, at a scale similar to you, when you're looking at it you...
i think you feel rather close to them or closer to them, and i always felt that traditional photographs were too small.
it's said that not so long ago you could conceal a dozen of the world's greatest photographs inside a folded newspaper.
not any more.
most top art photographers think big.
but the work of andreas gursky probably covers more square metres of gallery wall than anyone else's.
what is a gursky?
well, it has to talk to us about globalisation.
it can't just be a landscape.
it has to be a kind of globalised, urbanised, semi-rural, mixed-use landscape.
and it can't just be a panorama.
it has to have kind of layers that conform to certain traditions of pictorial composition.
though trained in the famously precise düsseldorf school of photography,
gursky's breakthrough image was as close as he's come to a snapshot.
this is a photograph, it's made in late '86 or '87.
and i travelled to italy alone, looking for landscapes combined with civilisation and human beings.
and so i made a couple of photographs.
and this situation i found by chance and went with a big five-by-seven-inch camera.
and... then i saw the cable-car coming and i didn't know before that the cable-car was coming there.
so i had to decide very quickly and just hold it and made one shot and this was the final photograph.
this is completely different to the way i work today.
behind this work stands two years of experience with formula one and i shot lots of pictures but i don't bring them to the market, so i keep them in my archive.
but after two and a half years i produced only two works - one in monaco and this one in bahrain.
much of the time has been spent using digital technology to refine and manipulate the image to produce the ideal, final photograph.
right now i am really interested in vertical images so, for me, this was not enough.
so this curve here was more on the left side and i combined it to the original circuit.
and the same was the... the background was also not exactly in this position, so i altered.
but i think these are the possibility nowadays.
working with photography, it's the same like dealing with painting that, in terms of composition, it makes sense to combine several details and find the... the final composition.
gursky and wall are both thoroughly modern artist-photographers.
but in staging elaborate set-ups or using the latest technologies, they are following in a tradition that reaches back to the early days of photography.
this seemingly realistic photograph by the french photographer, camille silvy, offers a masterclass in 19th-century photographic manipulation.
when i first saw the camille silvy river scene, france,
i didn't really know anything about it but i just thought it was marvellous.
and then i realised this was the directorial mode in 1858 because i realised that camille silvy arranged where the people should stand, so the working-class people are on the common land on the right of the picture, the country bourgeoisie are on the private property on the left,
at the end of their garden, about to go on a boat trip.
we have this artificial sky that he has added.
but more than that, he's done extraordinary things.
in fact, ansel adams was the person who told me the most dastardly thing camille silvy did was to introduce a white cloud just above the horizon, just where the two bits of the photograph meet, this sort of dead zone.
and he did that so we would read the two as one picture.
he added leaves to the trees cos he wasn't satisfied that they were lively enough, you know.
and what's really surprised me is that camille silvy, one of the great photographers of the 19th century, didn't even take this photograph himself.
it was taken, we now know, by somebody called françois moutarde - frank mustard.
isn't that...
isn't that terrible?
just don't worry about your footsteps.
i just wanna get rid of that track.
although "frank mustard" would find much that was strange and wonderful in the world of 21st-century photography, there are some things he would recognise instantly.
ok.
position... and hold.
but the parallels between the 19th century and today go beyond staging and manipulation.
then, photography was too new to be confined by definitions of what it could or couldn't be.
it was anything that photographers wanted it to be, from high art to low commerce.
in the 20th century, definitions and distinctions grew up, confining photography's erratic genius into tightly controlled channels.
in the 21st century, the rigid division of photography into categories like fashion, advertising, art or documentary have collapsed.
0nce again, photography is anything photographers want it to be... even if that means exchanging the wizardry of today for the magic of the past.
photographer sally mann uses the same wet-plate collodion process that camille silvy did.
in the 21st century, the techniques of the 19th are as readily available as the latest digital technology, so long as you have a steady enough hand.
you pour the collodion on the plate and you have to sort of spread it around very carefully and then drain it off.
it's harder than it looks to actually pour those plates so that you don't get lines and ridges and streaks.
and it has to reach a certain kind of texture before it really works properly.
and when it gets to that feeling, you put it in the silver nitrate.
and when you remove it, the silver nitrate has adhered to the collodion.
at which point it's sensitive, so you have a fairly short period of time in which to get your picture.
mann has been taking pictures of her family for years.
today she is photographing her husband, larry.
you have a fairly short period of time in which to get your picture - generally around, like, six minutes - because as it's drying it's losing sensitivity.
so you put it on your camera, pull out the dark slide and start counting.
i've photographed him for years and years, to just document him as a human being.
but also because, you know, he's a lovely male.
so that was how it started.
but coincidentally, he was diagnosed with muscular dystrophy and his body was beginning to change.
he was losing his muscles in his right arm and his left leg.
so the pictures began to take on a certain poignancy.
it does seem a little peculiar to be regressing, rather than stepping into the next century.
i think the pictures that i take are fairly modern, however, so i don't think it matters what the technique i use is.
i think it would be great to use digital.
i have no problems even contemplating that.
i think it would be fine if i could get the same feeling that i get with collodion, which i'm sure might be possible with some really fancy, you know, program.
so i feel like we're still having problems with this.
the fire hydrant here is a problem.
meanwhile, in his new york studio,
gregory crewdson is pulling out all the digital stops with retoucher, kylie wright.
he's putting the finishing touches to the picture he began weeks before on snowy main street in pittsfield.
... in the earlier one where this building was really bright and kind of flat at the same time, so we really amped up the contrast and we darkened it a lot.
took the fire hydrant out from the final one.
another thing that we do in all the photographs when we're on streets is we work with the electrical company to turn off all the street lamps because they're the wrong colour-temperature for our film.
and then kylie then turns them all back on.
what we're finished with at the end of the day is its own thing.
erm... it's definitely photographic... but something that's also...
something other than a photograph.
what i'm hoping to do is create a world that feels subjective and recognisable.
that's the thing that keeps me engaged.
final exposure.
that is a wrap.
fantastic job, everyone.
perfect photograph.
__file_terminal__
photography today looks like this.
but it also looks like this.
and this.
and of course it looks like this, too.
80 billion photographic images will be taken this year alone.
lot number six.
photography also looks like this.
one million.
an object of desire for dealers, collectors and hedge-fund managers.
at 2,400,000.
today, photography is not only worth bidding for... it's worth fighting for.
cynical, voyeuristic, exploitative - all these were the words that i heard.
and it's also worth faking for.
i was told that it was one of two prints.
then there was another.
then there was another one.
and they all looked the same.
this is a snapshot of photography in the digital age.
diverse, ubiquitous, valuable and technologically advanced.
but like any good snapshot, there's more going on here than meets the eye.
the medium has never been more widely appreciated or more eagerly exploited.
but what does it mean to be a photographer today?
and what is a photograph really worth these days?
garbage.
just go back and don't... 0n main street in pittsfield, massachusetts, lights are being rigged, props are being positioned and the talent are taking their places.
let's get...
ok, let's get larry...
let's get larry in the car.
ok, clear frame.
we got lights inside the car.
it looks like a movie, sounds like a movie and smells like a movie.
but it isn't.
all of this activity is to make a single photograph... by gregory crewdson.
i work with a production crew that all come out of film.
we work with cinematic lighting.
but we are only after creating one, single, perfect moment.
not the car track.
try to clear all those tracks.
as much of those as you can.
crewdson even has his own director of photography and his own camera operator.
and... hold.
relax.
i do have this strangely disconnected relationship to photography.
i don't even like holding the camera.
erm...
i don't take the actual picture.
what i'm truly interested in is images.
and then the camera is just a necessary instrument.
smack right in the middle of the street.
yeah, a car width.
0ver an 11-day shoot in a variety of locations,
crewdson's team will make a series of multiple exposures which will be digitally combined to make six final images.
he'll produce an edition of six prints of each image, priced at approximately $60,000.
there's already a list of prospective buyers.
let's get everyone in position.
and... hold.
with his striking tableaux, which combine hollywood production values with suburbia's bad dreams,
crewdson has become a hot property, confident that he has an audience who will appreciate and, if they can afford it, buy his work.
the hand goes back.
one second.
this is exactly where it should be.
this is the picture.
let's just really make sure we fucking get it.
hold.
final exposure.
that is a wrap.
fantastic job, everyone.
perfect photograph.
for crewdson, the business and benefits of being a photographer feel very different from the experience of earlier generations.
robert adams, a highly respected photographer who first came to prominence in the early '70s, had to contend with very different realities, with only his wife on his team.
it's good that people can earn enough money to free their own time and have their own years when they have full energy to work and explore what's been given to them.
but kerstin and i lived most of our working life on her income as a librarian, and together we were earning something like the salary of a beginning-bus driver.
we never went hungry, we were never scared, but many is the time that i worried a lot, and sleepless nights about whether i could afford to buy the equipment i needed, which was tedious.
the photography world was a different place then and it had few friends in high places.
i tried to call the new york times and get our exhibitions listed in the art calendar and the woman from the new york times - and this would be late '71 - told me...
the direct quote is, "we don't list photography.
photography is not an art.
but something happened that opened up the field where things were just happening and it was like a garden blooming - there were things all over.
the change, which began in america but would ultimately spread to the rest of the world, began when photo-literate teenagers graduated from buying reproductions of their favourite photographs to collecting the real thing.
i'm a baby-boomer.
i'm 53 years old.
i grew up looking at the picture magazines, learning about the world we live in from looking at photographs.
the fact that people who love it, because they grew up with it, coming of age, helped people understand that photography's interesting to look at... and that it's a lot of fun to be a collector.
by the late '70s, baby-boom enthusiasm had brought the market in photography into the mainstream.
and prices rose accordingly.
photographers like william klein, who made their names decades before the market boom, found prints they had made for reproductions in books and magazines now treated with a strange new reverence.
if i would give a photograph to somebody, they would either fold it up and put it in a drawer or put it on the wall with thumb-tacks and so on.
and now people put on white gloves and use two hands and they go for a lot of money.
you know, it's like a russian bond that you paper your toilet with and suddenly er... people decide that they're going to redeem these bonds and they're worth money.
does that make you feel good?
make me feel good?
it amazes me.
at 21,000, 22,000.
bidding at 22,000.
we have pushed the prices of photographs at auction up and up and up.
but along with auction-house respectability has come a new scale of values for assessing the worth of a photograph.
prints that command the highest price tags are usually the ones that were made by the photographer himself, closest to the time the picture was actually taken.
like fine wines, these prints are known as "vintage".
so, what i just took off the wall here is a print made in the mid-1940s of this signature image of ansel adams.
but in fact, the negative was made nearly 20 years earlier and this is one of the first prints that he made, in 1927.
so this is a true vintage print that adams made of the monolith in 1927.
this is all blocked up here.
it's all about huge amounts of... areas of dark, whereas here he striates the dark with the snow.
and all that is, of course, differences that are done in the darkroom.
i'm not actually sure which i like better.
i probably, in this case, in fact prefer the later print.
but as mattis knows, his preferred print's monetary value is two thirds that of its older sibling.
ever since henry fox talbot discovered how to produce prints from a single negative, infinite reproducibility has been a unique feature of photography's genius and key to its astonishingly rapid rise to prominence.
but for dealers and collectors, photography's greatest strength remains its biggest problem.
when it comes to a photograph, less - as far as the market is concerned - is more.
it used to be that, in the '70s and '80s, when the photography market was just getting started, there was no such thing as editions.
it didn't exist.
ansel adams did not have editions.
somebody came to ansel adams and said,
hey, why don't we put a cap on this of 100 and we can ask more money for it?
it's a marketing thing.
dealers have had their work cut out, trying to make photographs behave like works of art.
but the medium is inherently promiscuous, as the market was rudely reminded in 1999.
in the early 20th century,
lewis hine used his photography to fight for social change and to celebrate the dignity of labour.
but 50 years after his death
hine's prints had become highly collectable artworks.
peter macgill bought a print of the powerhouse mechanic.
i bought one.
i was told that it was one of two prints.
and it was beautiful.
it was big, it was warm-toned, it was signed on the back, it was stamped on the back.
all the things that we thought were important were there, in place.
then there was another one.
and they all looked the same.
collector michael mattis had also bought the powerhouse mechanic.
but as a theoretical physicist, he was confident that science could get to the bottom of this sudden glut of hines.
i thought it might be a weekend's work to conclusively date a sheet of photographic paper.
but it turned out that we had to develop all sorts of new dating criteria, which are now commonly in use in the photography world, some of which we borrowed from the fbi.
these were forensic techniques used, for example, to de-bunk the infamous hitler diaries.
so, it turned out that there are certain kinds of chemicals called obas... or optical brightening agents, which were put into photographic paper, only starting in 1955.
and in fact, the hines were chock-full of obas and hine died in 1940.
confronted with the evidence,
hine's former darkroom assistant, walter rosenblum, finally admitted to turning out the prints to profit from the market demand.
rosenblum was a master printer.
the prints he made were of the finest quality, struck directly from the negatives hine had exposed over 50 years before.
but the market was not impressed.
a fake is a fake if it's a baseball card, a painting or a photograph.
they're... they're not correct.
that history is important and now i have to show a very specific line of provenance.
the picture started in the photographer's hands and went doot doot doot doot and if there's a blank there i have to represent it as a blank.
so when a rare vintage print with a perfect pedigree, crafted by the photographer himself, is united with a stunning image, the market gets excited.
that's what happened in 2006 when sotheby's auctioned edward steichen's 1904 masterpiece,
the pond
moonlight.
this elaborate print is one of only three that steichen made.
it may not be a one-off like the mona lisa but, for a photograph, it's pretty close.
lot number six, edward steichen, the pond
moonlight.
1,000,000.
1,100,000.
1,200,000.
i've never sold anything for over $1 million before.
1,500,000.
not many people who do photo-auctions have.
1,800,000.
i thought in my own mind, "what am i gonna do when i get to a million?
1,900,000.
but in the back of my mind i'd also asked myself,
what am i gonna do if it goes to two million?
at 2,400,000.
i want everybody to think hard.
i was completely relaxed and having a great time and was able to wait and just let it happen.
at 2,600,000 up front.
bidding at 2,600,000.
at 2,600,000, are we all done?
last call.
going once.
and twice.
for 2,600,000.
thank you.
2,600,000.
the pond
moonlight is, to date, the most expensive photograph ever sold.
inevitably, the market has changed what it is to be a successful photographer in ways great and small.
releasing a new body of work demands a whole lot more thought than in the days when william klein casually handed out his prints.
i got one little spot that's...
this is alec soth, a rising star in documentary photography.
his latest series is devoted to niagara falls and the people who are drawn there.
what number was that falls?
02.
misty is for gagosian, 2430.
today he's at his lab, approving prints before they're dispatched to his gallery and individual collectors.
ok, so i think we're good to go on this one.
when i made the niagara work i was thinking about sad love songs.
i was sort of thinking of the whole project, after a while, as a sad love song.
and there's something really sensual... about a sad love song, it's like taking a bath.
but when it comes to protecting the market value of his prints,
soth can't afford to be sentimental.
wouldn't you know it?
then there's a big one.
it's too big.
that wasn't the size that...
i mean, it doesn't look bad, right?
but it's too big.
although technically perfect, the rogue print is now too valuable to survive.
i've heard stories of people just grabbing prints out of the garbage from other labs and making copies and selling them on the streets.
which is pretty scary, so i always cut whatever is rejected in front of the client just so he knows that it's going straight into... the garbage.
nowadays, great photographs are not only worth stealing, they are also worth fighting over.
in 0ctober 1997 the gagosian art gallery in new york introduced a new photographer to its fashionable clientele.
manhattan was a long way from bamako in mali, where in the 1950s and early '60s
seydou keita served a different kind of market.
by the '90s he was long retired but in his day he'd been a studio photographer of national renown.
seydou keita was the place to go if you wanted to have a beautiful image of yourself.
that was the studio to go for the local bourgeoisie and even for the middle class who wanted to grow in the social level.
keita's studio had a ready supply of desirable props for clients to pose with as if they were their own.
la bicyclette, la moto... bicycles, mopeds, cars - the props went from small to medium to large.
vespas were average but a car was a luxury.
and he didn't just stop at one.
he had lots, so people thought he was well off.
and for the time, he was.
pour moi et pour beaucoup... for me and for many others the iconic photograph by seydou keita is this one.
seydou keita didn't know anything about the paintings of ingres or manet or anyone else, but you see how he positions this woman, like the odalisque.
this is an absolute masterpiece.
she came with her blankets to show that she owned lots of them.
you had to see it.
seydou keita would have remained a strictly local hero if three of his photographs hadn't turned up in a show of african art in new york in 1991.
the pictures were attributed to the world's most prolific photographer, unknown.
0n seeing the exhibition, andré magnin, a parisian curator, set off for mali immediately, with photocopies from the catalogue as his only lead.
by asking around, he managed to track the "unknown"photographer down.
so i went to seydou keita and introduced myself and i showed him the photocopies.
and he said, "they're mine,
and he was astounded that someone would come so far for this.
so i explained to him we were putting together a collection and were interested, amongst other things, in photography.
magnin left mali, trusted with some of keita's negatives, hoping to find a new audience for his work in the west.
i talked to keita many times about having a contract, and he told me, "andré, i will be with you until my death.
the word of an old man is stronger than a contract.
with magnin as a guide around the art market,
keita's photographs, some now blown up to 80 times their original size, migrated from the living-room walls of bamako to the gallery walls of the cartier foundation in paris and the gagosian in new york.
there were 2,000 people at that opening at the gagosian.
it was a huge success.
everybody was there and knocked out by those photographs.
and they congratulated keita on his work and keita was extremely proud.
he was also becoming extremely rich.
his photographs were now selling for up to $16,000 apiece.
he was even commissioned to shoot a fashion story for top american style magazine, harper's bazaar.
but as keita's value soared, he attracted the interest of a professional dealer.
i was consultant for a website in the uk so they sent me to bamako in order to sign photographers and i met seydou and he proposed me to be his agent.
i said, "well, you know, it's...
you already have people who you work with,
and he said, "oh, you know, it's er...
and i said, "well, i would love to do it but i sign contracts with my artists,
and he said, "ok, write a contract and come back.
and that's what i did and he...
i became his agent until he died.
keita's death in 2001 sparked a major dispute between patras and magnin.
it turned on the custody of 921 of keita's precious negatives.
both claim the support of keita's heirs and insist they are carrying out the photographer's wishes.
and suddenly the battle started, for the happiness of lawyers like me and for the happiness of the market, because it meant the value of seydou keita increasing.
for now, there is a legal stalemate until a court decides on who has control over the 921 negatives... on which future sales of keita's work depend.
nearly 1,000 negatives are missing and this has been really difficult for us to develop seydou keita and give seydou keita to the world.
j'ai déjà vu... i've seen it done before - you can make some prints out of photographs, as you see here, really well done.
but they're fake.
you need the negatives.
i'm thinking that this battle and this litigation will go on for years and years and years.
but what i can see is that seydou keita is now of great value in the market of the photography.
the meeting in mali between photography and the market led to the courts.
but in china it's thrown up issues of another sort.
in this crucible of modernity, photography and the market have embraced each other with the same eagerness as the chinese have taken to mcdonald's.
but theirs is a complex relationship.
for western photographers like the canadian, ed burtynsky,
china's transformation from sleeping giant into industrial superpower provides subject matter for thought-provoking, awe-inspiring panoramas.
but for native-born photographers, tackling the same issues is complicated by ghosts of the not-so-distant past.
until relatively recently, photography in china was heavily restricted and used almost exclusively as propaganda.
li zhensheng was a red army news soldier, a photojournalist who in the 1960s and early '70s found himself covering the cultural revolution.
this is the red soldiers' dance.
it echoes the government slogan, "it is right to rebel.
this gesture means "beat the capitalists down to the ground.
but in the fever of revolution, the photojournalist's ideal of being in the right place at the right time could easily become a case of wrong place, wrong time.
in the cultural revolution it was very chaotic.
one day you could be a star and the next day you'd be denounced.
so i tried to take care of my pictures and not let anyone find them.
if they found them they'd have been burnt and i'd have lost all my negatives... so i hid them in order to protect myself.
today it's possible for li's photographs to see the light of day, but not in china.
in new york they're being promoted by a top agency, desirable products to be sold alongside the work of celebrity photographers like annie leibovitz.
the capitalists may have been beaten to the ground but now they've returned.
for the younger generation, photography is the perfect medium for exploring the strange no-man's-land that lies between what china once was and what it is becoming.
in london, one of china's hottest photographers, wang qinsong, is having his first solo show in the united kingdom.
though it's rooted in the dilemmas of modern china,
wang's work has found its most appreciative audience a long way from the streets of beijing.
tramp is gonna be the centrepiece of geoff's new office, so a lot of people from all over the world will see it.
he thinks that he has been like an outsider in the big city so he himself is a tramp inside this big city.
we're thinking to have this image for the venice biennale.
but as wang has realised, even work that tries to address the black comedy of the global market still has to play by the market's rules.
the only problem is i like to buy everything.
i discovered there was a danger as the market opens up.
today the man buys my work and tomorrow he sells it to the auction house.
it's like he's gambling on my work, he doesn't really like it at all.
so i began to halve my output and refuse to sell to anyone who doesn't really appreciate my work.
this speculation is harmful to artworks so i'm going to carry on reducing my production.
this is how i protect my work and forge a better future.
0ne photographer who would have understood
wang's desire for a better future was edward steichen.
he may have created the world's most expensive photograph,
the pond
moonlight, but at the time he was an art-for-art's-sake artist who got very little for his pains except the odd murmur of appreciation.
it was only later, in the 1920s, he realised he wanted to make photography pay, and so re-established the link between photography and money which had been one of the medium's founding principles.
it wasn't just about money but, on the other hand, steichen felt there was no reason why talented photographers should starve.
there is an argument that's been going on for years - does art have to be pure and only made for the sake of the beauty of the picture or is it all right to be paid for something that sells products?
and of course, when steichen started doing that kind of work in the 1920s,
alfred stieglitz, who was his great friend and promoter, was horrified.
stieglitz had a very precious kind of sensibility and also he never had to earn a living.
steichen not only had to earn a living but he was curious about other uses for photography and about the potential for reaching people.
and when he made a wonderful photograph it could be advertising, it could be paid for for fashion or whatever, but it was a wonderful photograph and it was a piece of art.
bolstered by contracts from publisher condé nast and ad agency j walter thompson,
steichen was defiant about his commercial work.
while stieglitz bragged about photographing old wagon-horses and poor devils,
steichen lavished photographic adulation on lighters, cutlery, shoes and lots and lots of hand cream.
it's a measure of how far photography has come that the battle between steichen and stieglitz over photography's commercial instincts seems as distant as photographs of the cultural revolution.
now you can be a professional photographer and at the same time you can be an art photographer.
you can jump from a magazine to a gallery and it's something that a little bit of sacrilege or...
ten years ago was something like nobody can do it, you know.
it was two different worlds and there was completely unaccessible.
and is very interesting.
i think this is a big new of the photography.
after ten years as a fashion photographer,
ventura is now enjoying his first new york solo exhibition, called war souvenir.
in these arresting, staged photographs, he's exchanged flesh-and-blood models for plastic ones.
when i first saw them i thought this is like this lost forensic evidence from activity taking place in italy during world war ii.
this unknown, hitherto undiscovered trove of colour photographs of city life during world war ii, which is of course nonsense - these are just fictions.
in a juxtaposition at which few eyelids bat,
ventura's photographs are now displayed in the same gallery as esteemed 1970s photojournalist, eugene richards.
but while photojournalism and art co-exist on the neutral territory of a fashionable gallery, photojournalism's heartland has proved to be more heavily fortified.
policed by men and women armed with their camera and their conscience, photojournalism remained a bastion of 20th-century photographic values - humanistic, politically engaged, liberal and serious.
in 1994 british photographer, martin parr, breached this final frontier when he applied to join photojournalism's super-agency, magnum.
i wanted to join magnum because at heart i'm a populist and i wanted to have this method of getting my work out.
and i thought, "if i join an agency i may as well join the most prestigious agency.
founded as a co-operative in 1947 by legendary photographers like cartier-bresson and robert capa,
magnum had built its reputation on searing images of conflict and suffering in far-flung places.
magnum photographers were meant to go out as a crusade, if you like, to places like famine and war and suchlike.
i went out and went round the corner to the local supermarket cos this, to me, is the front line.
parr's territory was very different from the magnum veterans' - the scruffy beaches of new brighton, for instance, packed with working-class holidaymakers.
not surprisingly, parr's application brought magnum's old guard to the barricades.
anyone who was described as margaret thatcher's favourite photographer certainly didn't belong in magnum.
his photographs titillate in some way but the fact is they are meaningless.
the principle objection would be that i would appear to be cynical, voyeuristic, exploitative.
all these were the words that i heard.
well, i think cartier-bresson put it most succinctly when he said, "i don't know who you are.
you're from another planet.
to a certain extent i see what he means and i don't have any problem with this.
and he got quite irate.
in a final bid to prevent parr's entry,
jones griffiths circulated an open letter to the entire membership.
"his penchant for kicking the victims of tory violence
caused me to describe his pictures as fascistic.
let me state that i have great respect for him as a dedicated enemy
of everything i believe in and, i trust, what magnum still believes in.
great stuff, isn't it?
when the members came to the final ballot,
parr scraped in by one vote.
i think he certainly heralded a major change in magnum.
and it's possible, you know, to get on the magnum website and have to reach for one's anti-nausea pill.
like anything, i think, magnum has to change, magnum has to expand, and since i became a member and the other people who've joined since have been essential to its creative, ongoing survival, if you like.
parr had to battle long and hard to bring his distinctive brand of photography into photojournalism's holy of holies.
by contrast, around the same time, photography was receiving the red-carpet treatment in the high temple of fine art.
0nce, this was a place where photographers barely had squatter's rights.
but in the 1980s this began to change, as a generation of artists started to use photography as readily as they would a palette or an easel.
leading the way was canadian, jeff wall, who was among the first to gain international recognition for his large-scale photographic works.
photography was, for a long while, sort of only on the margins of the fine arts even though, i think, more perceptive people from the very beginning recognised that there was no reason why this technology wouldn't be an artform like any other.
so there's no reason why one can't just be an artist whose medium is photography.
jeff wall didn't re-invent photography but he took photography back to the 19th century to painting, where everything is created - the people, the light.
everything is kind of constructed for a meaning.
but he sort of fed in a lot of kind of contemporary theoretical concerns - concerns about gender, about how men and women look at each other, concerns about racial stereotyping.
i like to think that sometimes my work begins by not photographing - that is, by seeing something, by being a witness but not photographing it.
i think the act of not photographing is quite important.
at least, it is to me.
so i remember it and i later decide that it has the potential to be a picture, the kind of picture i want to make.
but when the time comes for a picture to be made, it's more than the work of a decisive moment.
wall can devote as much time to his photographs as a painter would to his canvas.
one of the women in that picture was hired to make that apartment into her own apartment and that she had several months to do.
when i asked the one to walk around the corner, you can't really direct a person to walk - you can just say, "walk.
how they look, how they feel, what the feeling is, is something that you can never really get by asking for it.
you just have to photograph over and over and over again until something happens.
so i'll probably photograph that woman a thousand times.
and only one picture was very good.
though wall's pictures reflect the themes and traditions of painting, his techniques owe a debt to modern advertising.
photographs like this new work called in front 0f a nightclub are produced as gigantic transparencies mounted in light-boxes to give the luminosity of an 0ld master but the impact of a billboard.
i never set out to make big photographs.
but the size that i use is based upon the way i see, so i work a lot at life-scale.
if you see another figure of a person in a picture, at a scale similar to you, when you're looking at it you...
i think you feel rather close to them or closer to them, and i always felt that traditional photographs were too small.
it's said that not so long ago you could conceal a dozen of the world's greatest photographs inside a folded newspaper.
not any more.
most top art photographers think big.
but the work of andreas gursky probably covers more square metres of gallery wall than anyone else's.
what is a gursky?
well, it has to talk to us about globalisation.
it can't just be a landscape.
it has to be a kind of globalised, urbanised, semi-rural, mixed-use landscape.
and it can't just be a panorama.
it has to have kind of layers that conform to certain traditions of pictorial composition.
though trained in the famously precise düsseldorf school of photography,
gursky's breakthrough image was as close as he's come to a snapshot.
this is a photograph, it's made in late '86 or '87.
and i travelled to italy alone, looking for landscapes combined with civilisation and human beings.
and so i made a couple of photographs.
and this situation i found by chance and went with a big five-by-seven-inch camera.
and... then i saw the cable-car coming and i didn't know before that the cable-car was coming there.
so i had to decide very quickly and just hold it and made one shot and this was the final photograph.
this is completely different to the way i work today.
behind this work stands two years of experience with formula one and i shot lots of pictures but i don't bring them to the market, so i keep them in my archive.
but after two and a half years i produced only two works - one in monaco and this one in bahrain.
much of the time has been spent using digital technology to refine and manipulate the image to produce the ideal, final photograph.
right now i am really interested in vertical images so, for me, this was not enough.
so this curve here was more on the left side and i combined it to the original circuit.
and the same was the... the background was also not exactly in this position, so i altered.
but i think these are the possibility nowadays.
working with photography, it's the same like dealing with painting that, in terms of composition, it makes sense to combine several details and find the... the final composition.
gursky and wall are both thoroughly modern artist-photographers.
but in staging elaborate set-ups or using the latest technologies, they are following in a tradition that reaches back to the early days of photography.
this seemingly realistic photograph by the french photographer, camille silvy, offers a masterclass in 19th-century photographic manipulation.
when i first saw the camille silvy river scene, france,
i didn't really know anything about it but i just thought it was marvellous.
and then i realised this was the directorial mode in 1858 because i realised that camille silvy arranged where the people should stand, so the working-class people are on the common land on the right of the picture, the country bourgeoisie are on the private property on the left,
at the end of their garden, about to go on a boat trip.
we have this artificial sky that he has added.
but more than that, he's done extraordinary things.
in fact, ansel adams was the person who told me the most dastardly thing camille silvy did was to introduce a white cloud just above the horizon, just where the two bits of the photograph meet, this sort of dead zone.
and he did that so we would read the two as one picture.
he added leaves to the trees cos he wasn't satisfied that they were lively enough, you know.
and what's really surprised me is that camille silvy, one of the great photographers of the 19th century, didn't even take this photograph himself.
it was taken, we now know, by somebody called françois moutarde - frank mustard.
isn't that...
isn't that terrible?
just don't worry about your footsteps.
i just wanna get rid of that track.
although "frank mustard" would find much that was strange and wonderful in the world of 21st-century photography, there are some things he would recognise instantly.
ok.
position... and hold.
but the parallels between the 19th century and today go beyond staging and manipulation.
then, photography was too new to be confined by definitions of what it could or couldn't be.
it was anything that photographers wanted it to be, from high art to low commerce.
in the 20th century, definitions and distinctions grew up, confining photography's erratic genius into tightly controlled channels.
in the 21st century, the rigid division of photography into categories like fashion, advertising, art or documentary have collapsed.
0nce again, photography is anything photographers want it to be... even if that means exchanging the wizardry of today for the magic of the past.
photographer sally mann uses the same wet-plate collodion process that camille silvy did.
in the 21st century, the techniques of the 19th are as readily available as the latest digital technology, so long as you have a steady enough hand.
you pour the collodion on the plate and you have to sort of spread it around very carefully and then drain it off.
it's harder than it looks to actually pour those plates so that you don't get lines and ridges and streaks.
and it has to reach a certain kind of texture before it really works properly.
and when it gets to that feeling, you put it in the silver nitrate.
and when you remove it, the silver nitrate has adhered to the collodion.
at which point it's sensitive, so you have a fairly short period of time in which to get your picture.
mann has been taking pictures of her family for years.
today she is photographing her husband, larry.
you have a fairly short period of time in which to get your picture - generally around, like, six minutes - because as it's drying it's losing sensitivity.
so you put it on your camera, pull out the dark slide and start counting.
i've photographed him for years and years, to just document him as a human being.
but also because, you know, he's a lovely male.
so that was how it started.
but coincidentally, he was diagnosed with muscular dystrophy and his body was beginning to change.
he was losing his muscles in his right arm and his left leg.
so the pictures began to take on a certain poignancy.
it does seem a little peculiar to be regressing, rather than stepping into the next century.
i think the pictures that i take are fairly modern, however, so i don't think it matters what the technique i use is.
i think it would be great to use digital.
i have no problems even contemplating that.
i think it would be fine if i could get the same feeling that i get with collodion, which i'm sure might be possible with some really fancy, you know, program.
so i feel like we're still having problems with this.
the fire hydrant here is a problem.
meanwhile, in his new york studio,
gregory crewdson is pulling out all the digital stops with retoucher, kylie wright.
he's putting the finishing touches to the picture he began weeks before on snowy main street in pittsfield.
... in the earlier one where this building was really bright and kind of flat at the same time, so we really amped up the contrast and we darkened it a lot.
took the fire hydrant out from the final one.
another thing that we do in all the photographs when we're on streets is we work with the electrical company to turn off all the street lamps because they're the wrong colour-temperature for our film.
and then kylie then turns them all back on.
what we're finished with at the end of the day is its own thing.
erm... it's definitely photographic... but something that's also...
something other than a photograph.
what i'm hoping to do is create a world that feels subjective and recognisable.
that's the thing that keeps me engaged.
final exposure.
that is a wrap.
fantastic job, everyone.
perfect photograph.
__file_terminal__
photographer joel meyerowitz is on the prowl.
he's looking for someone who interests him, to make a portrait - to capture some truth about a person in a single frame.
if i saw someone whose character radiated out in front of him,
i would say, "stop.
i need to take a photograph of you.
what you were doing the first time was really beautiful.
i have to call my agent.
i'll get him on the phone. "could you get him to do what he's told to do?
you know what?
i'm gonna share you, i'm gonna take a portrait of you.
really?
yeah, right in front.
stand like you stood, right there.
right?
yeah.
don't move.
let me just take a quick reading.
ow.
ow, that hurts.
ow.
stop it.
ow!
you're a big sissy, you.
ow!
so, forget about me.
really give yourself through the camera.
really give it the look... that is you.
i'm gonna watch you and see when i think you might actually give me some mystery or secret that you are.
i have a secret.
whatever ferocious...
don't look at me.
you give that crazy look right in there.
yeah.
oh, that was it, that was great.
photographers have always pointed their cameras at us.
but what are they looking for?
from the liberated '60s to the me-me-me decade that was the '90s, photography, like the times, went in search of the self.
it was a quest that was to take photographers out of the studio and into the unknown.
it was a walk on the wild side.
new york.
in the early '60s, photographer diane arbus roamed these streets.
although charming and quietly spoken, she declared that the camera gave her the licence to strip away what you want people to know about you to reveal what you can't help people knowing about you.
a runaway from a well-to-do background,
arbus spoke openly of photography's power both to steal and exploit other people's faces and lives.
but in taking her pictures she tried, in her own words, to be good.
photographers have always sought out certain kinds of marginalised subjects.
it's been one of the big controversies, especially in recent years of the scholarship of photography, whether or not photographers tend to prey upon vulnerable people, people who are exposed socially, economically, culturally in some way.
i mean, look in the depression era, how many of the down-and-out people who were migrating from the midwest to the west coast got photographed.
that's cos you could get access to them.
they were literally out in the streets.
this is a walker evans photograph entitled sharecroppers prepare to have their picture taken.
their faces reveal the emotions we all feel when someone wants to take our picture - anticipation, indifference, nervous preparation... even boredom.
but what about the man behind the camera?
did evans feel compassion for his downtrodden subjects or was he simply driven by his hungry eye?
and what of arbus?
what appetites did she need to satisfy?
she was not threatening, she was curious.
and i think it was her real, native curiosity, her awe... of their original individuality... that loosened them up to be present.
and she also whispered when she spoke.
she was incredibly articulate and poetic... ... but when she spoke, she would just talk to you, right here.
and people would have to kind of lean in to hear her.
and the more they leaned in, you know, she was like...
she put the honey right there.
and they kept leaning in until they were stuck.
and they liked it so they kept on licking and they were... they were in it.
arbus's work is genius but it's all about her.
it's all about her.
i felt that it was the work of somebody who wanted to be anybody but herself... and she was trying on everybody else's skin.
and the degree of empathy - which is so rare in any art - that she had was because she so desperately didn't want to be herself.
if arbus photographed those in whom she recognised her own anxieties and vulnerabilities, those people were just as easily found in uptown society.
in 1969 she accepted a private commission to photograph the rich and successful konrad matthaei and his family over the christmas holiday.
the matthaeis had connections at the museum of modern art in new york, whose director suggested her because arbus was herself connected to many of the city's important taste-makers at the time.
she was a risky choice for the matthaeis but this was the age of radical chic.
we've been asked several times why on earth would anybody hire diane arbus to do a family shoot, a family portrait?
and the point was that we found her work unique and remarkable and we were very pleased with the results.
every year i would have a family portrait done by various photographers.
but they'd all been men.
i mean, i wanted to see my children as...
you know, get good portraits of them so this was sort of an annual event.
diane was available and we were happy to have her.
now that i look back at it she may have needed the money.
my mother was really looking for someone a museum would consider cutting-edge as opposed to...
i mean, she was well aware of what diane arbus's work was like.
we were so busy that she was going to have to get what i call more snapshots between us because we were wandering and...
and therefore, to get the real portraits she would probably have to spend some time with the children, which she did.
she took lots of pictures of them.
she didn't say, you know, "look grumpy now,
or "look like frankenstein now," or, "look..." you know.
but i was, you know, right at the edge of adolescence.
you know, clearly i had been brought up to be well-mannered, or at least i knew what good manners were, and i was about at the point where i was going to stop having them but not quite there yet.
and i think, looking into the photographs now, what i'm struck by is how that rage and frustration seems to be popping out of my eyeballs, although not really apparent anywhere else on my body.
i thought i did quite a good job, actually.
you know, she was raised in similar sort of stuffy circumstances and i wonder if she didn't recognise a bit of that sense of the crummy princess that she felt she was in me at the time and see that sense of...
i'm not sure that they flattered anybody but i thought they were very interesting pictures and we have, you know, albums of photographs of us looking... great, so the idea was to really get something that was of...
although at that time we didn't know that she was going to be what she is today.
of course there were standard ones - the family-under-the-monet sort of picture.
that's the standard one.
we'd have to have that for everybody.
i think i'm sort of boring-looking in those pictures.
no, no.
i must say, i don't think she was particularly interested in me, i must say.
i mean, i think that...
but i also was very busy running around, getting the dinner on the table and talking to everybody, so maybe i wasn't as available as other people were.
she liked the portrait of marcella, i think, in the white dress.
i liked the portrait of marcella sitting on a loveseat in a brown velvet dress.
she was sort of like this, sort of slumped.
erm... not happy but, you know, resigned.
diane seemed to have caught something that marcella has become.
she caught a little bit of that.
arbus didn't only catch personal unease.
she was instinctively witnessing the mood of a nation slipping into despair.
the community - and really, it was a politically liberal community again who had had great hopes when kennedy was elected - then very rapidly began to get disillusioned with the war in vietnam and so forth and so on.
a mood that had overtaken the whole country by '67, '68, of disaffection, of concern, of dismay.
whatever side you were on, you felt the times were out of joint.
well, diane arbus, in her own interest and following...
she had the kind of courage to follow what were considered peculiar tastes in cultural milieus of different kinds.
diane arbus may never have found whatever she was looking for in the streets, parks, flophouses and posh apartments of '60s new york.
if she did it wasn't to her liking.
in 1971, only two years after her christmas at the matthaeis, she took her own life.
her work tied into a mood that came along later and made her very famous - a fame that was of course brought to an apotheosis, a very tragic one, by her suicide.
but nevertheless, it made her herself the kind of personality who maybe did represent something really seriously wrong with our culture.
why commit suicide?
it's a question that haunted all of us who knew her.
because if photography was our reason for being - and she was really in it - if it couldn't sustain her we were in trouble.
to deal with ordinary, innocent people in some way and try to get them to expose themselves to you in one frame is a chancy thing, it's a challenge.
rather than the set-up-studio shooting session of, let's say, dick avedon... where there was a constant hammering away until he pared the person down to whoever was left after it and to whatever he... needed.
having earned his reputation in the world of fashion,
richard avedon became the celebrity photographer of the age.
but his striking portraits of america's political and cultural elite from the late '50s until his death in 2004 were the result of confrontation, not collaboration.
he took all control away from the sitter and placed it firmly behind the camera.
this was far from the polite portraiture of photographers like cecil beaton in the '30s and '40s... a time when photography's job was simply to make the famous look divine.
modern portraiture became impolite.
it dragged soft-focus celebrity out of its soft-focus world and into an uglier, post-war, nuclear age.
the celebrity is particularly expert at presenting a pre-packaged self to the world.
in attempting to capture the person behind the mask photographer tony vaccaro approached his subjects with cunning to ensure that his celebrity portraits reflected his opinions, not theirs.
they are always on guard.
all these people, they were always on guard.
photography, to me, is a form of placing that person you photograph on a pedestal.
now, it is imperative that the pedestal be the right size.
in other words, the picture has to have that special quality for that person, what he has in here.
forget about the appearance.
once you determine the personality of an individual, you have to narrow down to a word that fits him more than any other word.
somerset maugham was suave.
how can i capture that word, "suave"?
and we're talking, he's walking towards the mirror.
i walk with him.
and at a certain point he does this but then suddenly he becomes a snob, kind of thing and, "this is it, tony.
and then you work...
bang!
that's it.
and it's all over.
i love portraits.
i like taking portraits but i never believe portraits because people are not what they appear to be.
i did a picture of my mother, my father and my brother and they all look very nice.
but it tells you nothing about the relationship.
it doesn't tell you that he was an alcoholic, that he and his wife had a very unhappy marriage and the alienation and all that.
in a way, it seems very strange that people tend to believe that when you photograph somebody, somehow you've captured somebody, you're revealing something.
and these are usually people you know nothing about.
that's why celebrities are so easy to photograph - because they're pre-packaged.
pablo picasso had avoided the photographic portrait since 1959.
he finally granted henri cartier-bresson an audience in 1966 and again in 1967.
but bresson himself was unhappy with the results.
in the summer of '68 an exasperated picasso invited tony vaccaro to his home in the south of france.
so there he stands, you know.
and he goes like this, you see.
and i'm not clicking so then he goes like this, you know.
then like this.
and i could tell.
i said, "this is avedon.
this is arnold newman.
this is..." you know.
i knew all the other photographers, the poses that he was giving.
and at a certain point i take my leica and i go like this.
i said, "something is not working.
so all of a sudden he... he just drops this mask that he was putting of himself and then...
bang!
...
i clicked.
the standoffs now being played out in front of the portrait photographer's camera were partly a metaphor for an increasingly confrontational relationship between politics, celebrity and the media.
in the states, the vietnam war and watergate proved beyond doubt that their interests were no longer the same.
while america seemed to be unravelling at the seams,
larry clark was simply taking pictures of his own life in tulsa, 0klahoma - a life of hanging out with friends, shooting drugs and guns and getting laid.
unlike arbus and avedon,
clark was an insider, not an outsider - a kind of neighbourhood photojournalist bivouacked in a part of america no one had bothered to see, certainly not that close up.
in his hands, photography became as personal and confessional as the written diary because he was one of them, not one of us.
you'd always expect a photographer to come along, find a scenario, get to know it a bit, photograph it, then go away again.
he always photographed the things that were part of his own life so that sort of a whole diary, if you like, of a way of telling a story, was something he very much started.
clark eventually published his intimate pictures as a book in 1971, simply titled, tulsa.
he was more or less a kid hanging out with a camera.
it's only after the photographs were taken and the book was published that i guess he would become aware of the fact that he was more of a photographer.
he just was hanging out there, taking photographs as he went along.
those larry clark tulsa pictures were profound and important.
first of all, he opened up a whole new, impolite genre - this really nasty thing that nobody wants to know about.
and these were not druggies hanging out in the bowery or in harlem - these were nice, suburban people in tulsa.
and that work was very authentic and very real.
there would have been intimate scenes done before this but i guess no one put it together as a book.
all the pictures here, of course, became very saleable, very commercial.
this whole idea of the diary, which has become an integral part of contemporary photography, was really initiated as much by clark as anyone else.
tulsa had a huge influence on me because it gave me permission.
you know, the only thing you can really photograph is your own tribe.
you know, when they say that african tribes or north african tribes are afraid of having their souls stolen by the camera, who was holding the camera?
look at me.
look down.
there's a boom over your head.
that often happens.
my whole life is a boom over my head.
nan goldin's work is confessional photography at its most extreme - a candid, insider's account of a world populated by transvestites, transsexuals...
there goes the tv.
...drug addicts and 24-hour party people.
i've always done this.
there's just nothing to step on.
this is joey, a transsexual goldin has photographed over the last 20 years as part of her love affair with what she calls the "third gender".
if arbus had shown us how freaky normal people could be,
goldin showed us the normality and humanity of those often treated as freaks.
in 1972, when i lived with transsexuals and transvestites in boston, they were hated by the gay community and despised by straight people.
they couldn't go out during the daytime.
they couldn't get any jobs.
it never once crossed my mind... as to whether they were men dressed in women's clothes.
they were always, to me, a third gender.
oh, that's beautiful.
marilyn never looked so good.
marilyn manson?
you are evil.
but so young.
the only people i really photograph are people i really love and generally have known for years and i've photographed them over the years.
they get to say what pictures are published or not.
i've only once in my life gotten a written erm... release.
inspired by the films of cassavetes and fassbinder, not by photography,
goldin created elaborate slideshows that were more like movies.
the most ambitious, the ballad 0f sexual dependency, comprised over 40 pieces of music and 900 slides of her friends and adopted family.
she started showing it in the new york clubs in the late '70s but by the mid '80s it was a celebrated gallery-piece and a major influence on both the look and feel of contemporary culture.
the first showing was for frank zappa's birthday party at the mudd club in new york in 1979 and i was holding the projector in my hands and, you know, putting the slides in.
it's basically about the difficulty men and women have maintaining relationships and... the incompatibility of the sexes and the... you know, distance and the misunderstandings and... male violence and all the roles that women are given
and... relationships that...
where you're sexually bound to somebody that you may not be in any way appropriately matched with.
it's a, you know, piece that evolved and evolved and evolved with the help of my friends.
and the first, you know, showings were for my friends.
look at me, baby.
when i first had a camera i was completely silent and photography was my first way to really communicate as an adolescent.
it was a way to seduce people.
it was my way to be fully present in the moment but to be able to hold onto the moment at the same time... so that i could save the moment but live the moment fully without having to worry about remembering it.
and that was always the motivation of my photography.
so i could be there and get lost at the same time.
he gave me his card... and he asked me to visit him out there.
but he...
i think he thought i was a queen.
but he was jerking off and then he had erm... an incredible large penis.
and...
and a huge coupe de ville.
i didn't really notice the car.
and he was jerking off and then he drove around the block, came back...
i took a picture and he came while i photographed him.
i love that.
i love to make people come by photographing them.
that's what i really wanna do.
in 1971, japanese photographer nobuyoshi araki had already taken the principle of diary-photography to new levels of intimacy.
he's a promiscuous photographer, snapping everything around him.
there are over 100 million people in japan.
araki must have photographed most of them.
his is a life completely accounted for by photography and sex.
serious photographer.
i am serious photographer.
yeah!
there is nothing araki won't photograph.
he publishes a book of his exploits every month, giving us an intimate, detailed picture of his daily life.
if you don't shoot photography you don't really remember much.
so having these photos does help me to remember.
i've reached the point now that i don't shoot what i don't want to remember.
i only shoot what i want to remember.
araki became known in 1971 when he took a detailed photographic account of his honeymoon with his new wife, yoko, which he self-published under the title sentimental journey - images of quiet intimacy and explicit sexual encounters.
but he didn't stop there.
when yoko died in 1990 he also photographed her final weeks in hospital and her funeral.
he published those pictures, too, under the title winter journey.
some of the honeymoon pictures were posed but there aren't many smiles to be seen and i don't really know now whether it was love.
even when i asked her, yoko said there was only one picture that she really liked - the one of her asleep in the boat.
in buddhism, there's a river you cross after death to enter nirvana.
but she also looks like an embryo and you can see that life is like a continuum.
but what really happened was that on honeymoon most people have lots of sex, too much sex.
so the thing she was most looking forward to most on the honeymoon, riding in the boat, we did it but she fell asleep because she was tired from too much sex.
it's hard to say whether you can reveal the inner person with photography but you have to be in the mindset that you're going to do that.
that should be your goal.
when you look at my black-and-white photography,
i feel that a lot of the time i can catch the past, present and future of that person all in one shot.
for my wife, in the case of her death,
i almost feel that she lived and also died quickly for me and for my photography.
that's the kind of woman she was.
araki had documented every detail of a 20-year marriage.
but beyond the adult relationship lay the final frontier - the family.
we all have family pictures somewhere close to hand.
but as the world of photography became increasingly introspective, subjective and confessional, the door to family life, usually closed, was kicked wide open.
the very private was becoming very public.
artist richard billingham didn't care about how his family ought to look when he turned his gaze on them and their situation at the heart of working-class life in thatcher's britain.
nor was he concerned about photography when he was living with his father, ray.
he was simply a would-be painter in need of a patient model.
i was living in this tower block.
there was just me and him.
he was an alcoholic.
he would lie on the bed, drink, get to sleep, wake up, drink, get to sleep.
didn't know if it was day or night.
but it was difficult to get him to keep still for more than, say, 20 minutes at a time so i thought if i could take photographs of him, that would act as source material for, you know, for these painti...
and then i could make more detailed paintings later on.
so that's how i first started taking photographs.
i'll show you the very first black-and-white photographs i took.
this guy here
i call him psychedelic sid - he would come down every day like the milkman and he would erm...
he made his own homebrew and he would put three bags of sugar in instead of one bag and he would make this homebrew that was 10% alcohol.
and that's how my dad could afford to be an alcoholic, cos he brought down the homebrew for my dad.
he would try to make his own photographs.
he'd say, "take a photograph of me doing this.
and i would kind of do it reluctantly.
my dad, he really doesn't care if that knife goes in him or the hammer comes down on his head.
it shows his vulnerability.
my mum had left at the time because of his incessant drinking.
she moved to a neighbouring tower block.
and i guess i was fascinated about him on his own in this room.
he'd created a psychological space around himself where he could drink uninterruptedly.
he only went to the bog.
he never used the kitchen or the living room or anything else.
i think this is the best black-and-white one that i took.
and then i started doing colour photographs cos i got this job at kwik save and i could afford to get the films processed at a colour lab.
well, i say "colour lab".
what, happy snaps or something like that.
i found that tripleprint was the best for me cos it was cheap but also they processed the prints so crappily they gave me ideas for paintings more.
i put that bread in there so that he might eat.
cos he never ate nothing for two years, while he was drinking.
i put that bread there so he might eat but he never ate it.
my dad had moved into my mum's place by this time.
and i couldn't believe how it looked, you know.
she'd had two years away from my dad so erm... she'd created her own psychological space around herself that was very carnivalesque and decorative.
there were dolls, jigsaws everywhere.
she'd got loads of pets by this time.
she'd got about ten cats and i think there were two, three dogs.
my dad's saying, "what d'you want from me?
all photography is exploitive.
the only thing you can do is to try and make the photograph so artistically good you overshadow that exploitive element that's inherent in the medium.
so that's what i've tried to do.
billingham's snapshots form a kind of family album no ordinary family member would ever make, let alone show.
this is not a family life of fake smiles and awkward calendar events.
they're more like a backstage glimpse of the chaotic rehearsals.
it's a view that turned billingham from a would-be painter into a celebrated photographer.
somebody came into the gallery one day and this was printed up large.
and this photographer, he said, "you know, you should have your mum's arm in focus.
but i wanted my dad's head in focus.
that's what it's really about - about him getting it from all sides.
and if my mum's arm was in focus it would just be a sensational image of my mum's tattoos.
and this was like, you know, a famous photographer and he said a dumb thing like that.
that's a bit like...
there's a velázquez painting it looks a bit like.
that's like the... the goya painting.
the photographs that i've took that i don't consider as pieces and i look at them, then i do see my family and i think about them and they...
i become a bit sentimental about them.
but these ones, no.
photographing family life can be even more risky when the camera and the power it gives us is in the hands of the parents, not the kids.
this is rural virginia, where sally mann photographed her three children,
jessie, emmett and virginia, growing up on the family farm in the late '80s.
published under the title immediate family, her images unintentionally expose a potential conflict of interest between being a good mother and a good artist.
her pictures of a childhood idyll, beset by implied dangers and adult glances, met with unease in an america slipping from reagan into the reign of george bush senior.
her son, jessie, is visiting the farm today.
mann continues to take portraits of her children as they grow up.
their photographic collaborations have become part of family life.
taking pictures deepens the transaction between me and family members that i photograph.
and it, in a certain sense, can complicate it a little bit.
erm...
but i feel that it also strengthened it a great deal.
as we were putting the work together over the years, they would say, "oh, i don't want that one in.
i look stupid" or...
they've refined their vision and their way of seeing how photographs work.
so, in a certain sense, doing that work sort of raised my stock with my family.
there's no way that i can get the pictures i do without the children working their particular magic in the picture, either by the way they shift their weight or by the expression they give or just some small gestural thing
that becomes the punctum of the image.
you don't get pictures like that with expressions like that...
you can't force someone to do that.
they have to give you the picture.
there's injury and there's... pain and there's... anger and there's resentment in their faces and there's, you know, pouting and there's...
it runs the gamut.
yeah, i certainly wanted to include all of that as well as happy moments.
but family life is, of course, as we all know, far more complex than it's usually portrayed.
some artists have confronted the role photography itself has played in creating and complicating our sense of domestic life.
larry sultan photographed his father and family over a ten-year period spanning the '70s and '80s as part of an elaborate project that included his parents' own photos, home movies and statements.
this was the reagan era, which preached the values of family life - a version sultan didn't recognise.
photography is there to construct the idea of us as a great family.
and we go on vacations and we take these pictures and then we look at them later and we say, "well, isn't this a great family?
so photography is instrumental in creating family, and not only as a memento, a souvenir, but also a kind of a mythology.
this is the house where sultan grew up, in the valley area of la, and where his father, irvin, led a successful business life.
this is where his father lives now, a gated community near palm springs.
as his son set about creating his version of the sultan family experience,
irvin struggled with the role his son now gave him.
you were so sceptical.
like, "ok, well, whatever.
whatever you wanna do is fine." but er, you know...
well, i will admit one thing.
i did get set and get comfortable and he'd say to me, "don't smile"... which would absolutely irritate me because when he says, "don't smile," in my mind i've no idea what he's projecting.
what is he trying to tell me what to do?
i didn't want anyone to smile because, one, that would look ridiculous.
the pictures had a different weight, had a different body to it.
it wasn't a...
it wasn't that kind of thing.
i remember that picture so distinctly and sitting on the bed... shirt and tie, dressed up.
and i look like a forlorn, lost soul.
and i look at that picture and i said, "that's not me.
yeah, and in fact you went even further.
you said, "that's not me sitting on the bed - that's you sitting on the bed.
"that's a self-portrait." -
and i thought that was right.
and you said this, too - you said, "any time you show that picture you should tell people
that that's not me sitting on the bed
looking all dressed up with nowhere to go, depressed.
that's you sitting on the bed, and i'm happy to help you with the project
but let's get things straight here.
that famous picture of you watching tv and mom posing...
oh, yes.
i have the proof sheet.
you were both standing there and i was photographing you both against the green wall.
and because i was taking so long and i was so clumsy, you said, "to hell with you," and you sat down and you watched the game.
and then jean... gave me that look.
like, "oh, you've been abandoned again.
she said, "i don't care how i look as long as you're successful.
which is such a great jewish-mother thing to say.
the very fact that i didn't follow the path of going to law school or whatever and i became an artist was a point of great contention between us.
you would say things like, "you're gonna be a loser, you're gonna..." blah blah.
i had to go through a lot of hell... to do what i do.
and part of the work came out of... that wound.
the daily practice of being a photographer is to be distanced, to have a little bit of room between what you're doing and how you see, what you look at.
for me, the biggest surprise was that the distance that i thought i needed as a photographer slipped.
it wasn't about these people, it was about us.
it really showed, in a subtle way... the tremendous love, feeling and thoughtfulness on his part, not to hurt me, not to do anything that i would find objectionable but deep, genuine feeling toward me
which, of course, warmed my heart, too.
and we've always felt that way and...
then and since.
mm-hm.
at least now he's gonna buy dinner.
dream on.
during the ten years sultan had been making his pictures from home series, a seismic shift in thinking about contemporary culture had taken place.
from french philosophy, down through academia and into the lofts of new york's soho came the steady drip, drip, drip of postmodernism.
it was only a matter of time before it seeped into the photographic darkroom.
the premise of postmodernism is that we now live in a culture so saturated with media imagery and media models of how people live that our idea of how one lives one's life, of who one is, is made up of that kind of media myth.
and in a sense it negates the idea of portraiture, the idea that you can dress up and go to a studio and somehow reveal your strength of character or your inherent humanity or whatever.
you don't have any inherent humanity in the postmodernist analysis of things.
we're all these composites of a lot of myths and narratives written by other people.
but you can still dress up, which is exactly what artist cindy sherman loved doing.
she turned a familiar children's game - dressing up as someone else - into art by photographing the result.
# i don't know how it happened
# i think i had been drinking
# i think i saw you naked... #
in her series called untitled film stills,
sherman created over 100 publicity-style shots reminiscent of scenes from old b-movies.
she appears in every one as a general type we seem to recognise only too well.
in denying her own identity she also captured something of the times.
she's got this incredible plasticity.
you wouldn't recognise her in the street.
i think many people originally felt that she... these were self-portraits - self-portrait as...
and so on and so forth.
but she didn't do that.
i don't think she's done a portrait of anybody.
these are all imaginary creatures.
she's just the girl, capital g, in this situation and that situation - she's in danger, she's in love, she's opening a letter like the starlet who has no identity other than the identity that the director gives her.
he says, "you're gonna be a nurse in this film.
you're going to be a secretary in this film.
who is this?
marilyn monroe, cindy sherman as marilyn or the real cindy sherman?
the queen of no identity now doesn't even venture into the streets to make her pictures whoever she is.
she's her own director, she's her own cameraman, she's her...
i don't know what a best boy is but she's the best boy.
she doesn't even have an assistant, basically.
she's just got this table er... with wigs and so forth and a mirror.
when i first met her i said, "why did you stop doing the untitled film stills?
and she said, "i ran out of clichés.
and so she had the sense that these were all, as it were, archetypes.
there's a kind of instant recognition of what that person wearing those clothes in that room has to be concerned with.
the belief in photography's ability to glimpse an essential self in a single frame was now under attack.
what had the intimate photography of nan goldin and larry clark really revealed about the lives of its subjects?
well, i mean, i think... if you want an erection in your photograph...
i happen to be an admirer of larry clark's work.
but i'm not convinced that intimacy necessarily leads to... a more truthful situation than not.
there is such a thing as photographic truth but that... the truth is rarely relevant to the specifics of the image.
you know, that person is probably not what you think they're like.
but what you think they're like is probably true, just not about them.
dicorcia's work challenges photography's claim to authenticity or genuine empathy when it comes to representing the lives of others.
for his series called hollywood he transformed corners of santa monica boulevard in la into a film set, artificially lit and composed.
he then recruited the boulevard's male hustlers to pose for him, paying them with money he'd received as a government grant.
this was a collaboration between photographer and subject in which the photographer 'fessed up to being a kind of hustler himself - a diane arbus with a chequebook.
to emphasise the mercenary nature of the photographic transaction, captions detail the hustler's name, his home town and his rate.
the concept, before i even started, was that i would pay them the same amount of money to be photographed as, you know, the lowest-common-denominator sex act on the street, which people still don't believe is $20 but erm... the...
well, there is inflation, i know.
anyway, there's an aspect of what they do which has to do with the presentation of self.
it's also the fact that they're a kind of commodity and this... it's kind of a label.
they are on santa monica boulevard, in the heart of hollywood, basically.
they often present themselves as stereotypes, you know, as a way of selling themselves.
and i thought that there was a real metaphorical connection between... them and hollywood.
it was essential, to make the thing complete, that there be this exchange, that the money that i was giving them be the money that the nea had given me.
and that somehow the photographic act was a substitute for the sex act.
you know, that there was this exchange that, i think, is part of photography.
there is an exchange, there is a collaborative aspect, especially in staged photography.
the way it was set up was i would arrange the picture beforehand with an assistant and everything would be left - the camera on the tripod in the position, the lights.
and then i would get into a car and drive down santa monica boulevard and approach them and basically just say, "listen, i'd like to take your photograph.
there's no sex involved.
if they were real hustlers then they would just try to get the maximum out of me.
the minute i had taken even one frame they wanted to get out the door, they wanted to get their money and go.
very often, though, they were not that way and we would change things around and...
i wouldn't say they suggested anything.
i mean, it's not like it's so much choice or...
at any one time of day it could be that there's nobody there, you know.
the police sweep the street and they're gone for a couple of days.
but when we face the final frontier that is the mirror, is there really no-one at home?
just a collection of clichés we've picked up along the way?
for some, photography is still the medium that engages directly with life, exploring it, exposing it, sometimes even preserving it.
photography has actually saved my life many times.
i've walked through a lot of things i'm afraid of by photographing them.
literally.
photographing myself after i was battered prevented me from going back to my lover... because, you know, it prevented my memory from being coloured by nostalgia.
you know, i was still in love with him but i couldn't...
you know, i had the picture there of what i looked like a month after i was battered.
and i couldn't go back to that.
i don't think i realised that that's what the picture was for.
i just wanted to see what it looked like.
photography has enabled me to never lose anyone.
or so i thought.
and then, when my best friend died in 1989
i had a big... kind of epiphany when i realised that i really had lost her, no matter how many pictures i had of her, and photography had failed me... because it doesn't do what i thought it would do at the beginning,
which is save people's lives.
can i see the shoulder on the other side?
it's like this scene in sunset boulevard.
i know.
it is.
are you ready for your close-up?
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
milky way
at the beginning of the 23rd century, in the center of the galaxy nebula,
president desslok has built up a huge nation, the galman empire.
he.s attempting to rule the entire space in the galaxy.
galman empire
long live president desslok!
report the battle status!
yes, west forces are commanded by commander histenbargar, obtaining more than 80 control!
that.s good.
commander histenbargar.s putting in all his might after his failure.
next one!
to the east, is commander gaidel!
yes!
general, our 18th mechanized armoured division has 2 planets under control.
lt.s just a matter of time.
gaidel, my birthday.s coming!
as promised, it.ll more victorious on that day than now.
l.m glad to have reliable men.
next one!
but president desslok has yet to know of it.
gaidel.s subordinate, commander dagon has extended his powers to the solar system and is battling yamato.
battle at barnard star
barnard star, planet 1.
galman empire, east forces base.
reflex boards have surrounded yamato!
target yamato, fire reflex guns!
ln search for a 2nd earth, yamato is attacked by immense laser rays on
barnard star, planet 1, 5.9 light years away from earth.
tail of vessel damaged!
2nd vessel bridge shot!
turn right 20 degrees!
damn!
we.ll be defeated if this continues!
if these are reflex guns, there should be reflex boards nearby!
no detection yet?
no detection!
but our enemy.s battleships are still around!
yoshikazu!
has captain contacted you?
not yet!
this is yamato!
cosmohound, please answer!
l.m kodai!
captain, how is it?
not yet found, but l.ll definitely find the reflector satellites!
shima, you must hang on!
yes!
weird, there must be satellites around.
let.s go search the sky again!
the reflex boards must be somewhere.
yes!
damn!
what.s deputy shima doing?
oh!
no wonder he.s deputy!
very good control!
ls it?
doctor sado!
what do you want to say?
come on, yoko, undergo the treatment!
ln order to follow her father who wants to uncover new lands,
yoko yamasaki migrated to barnard star, planet
but in the harsh environment, yoko lost her husband to the unique disease on the planet.
her father is now suffering from the same sickness.
he was brought to yamato after being rescued by kodai.
no problem, you.re not suffering from the disease.
that.s great, yoko.
thank you.
number 3, shift position by 15 degrees.
shift towards the right.
full power!
reflector satellites prepared for continual firing!
power recharge 120!
transmission center fully prepared!
reflex boards in place!
good, fire continuously!
damn!
turn right 30 degrees!
yamato, turn right 30 degrees!
all battleships turn right 30 degrees!
what?
reflex boards aren.t satellites?
thunder, quick transmit signals to yamato!
please let me fire!
alright!
thank you!
l.m counting on you!
sure!
tokugawa, open all the engines!
push forward with maximum power!
yes!
open all engines!
alright!
yamato is coming nearer!
send the protection vessel out!
good, fire laser canons towards reflex boards and planes!
yes, target at reflex boards and planes.
fire!
success!
ryusuke, good work!
protection vessel.s here!
l.m kodai!
our enemy.s protection vessel is coming!
cosmo tigers, set off!
yes!
cosmo tigers, set off!
those scoundrels!
just look!
shoot them down!
ah!
damn!
why aren.t the cosmo tigers here yet?
l.m kato!
kato!
now, the position is b!
spread out 30 degrees to the right!
you should see them soon!
alright!
everyone, spread out 30 degrees to the right!
get into battle formation!
lt.s time to show your talents!
just look!
there!
senior kato!
we.re saved!
ah!
damn!
l won.t let you escape!
serve you right!
what?
hamu?
everybody, come with me!
thank you, leader!
hamu , don.t work alone.
be more careful next time!
l.m sorry, l.ll be more careful!
oh?
ryusuke, the source of laser rays is found!
destroy them at 1 go!
l.m counting on you!
yes!
so how?
bull.s eye!
ah!
what?
lt.s not the source of the laser rays.
lt.s transmissions!
shima, those are new reflex guns!
what?
there are numerous transmission centers!
no matter how many we destroy, it would still be useless!
so, where is the source?
we.ll find it!
yamato, go to position of 340 degrees!
alright!
yamato going towards position of 340 degrees in full speed!
captain, there may be a concentration of power at the 10 o.clock direction.
perhaps that.s the source of the reflector satellites!
let.s rush over!
alright!
lt.s the enemy.s base!
looks like land battle is not possible.
l.m kodai!
we.ve found the enemy.s base!
rush over immediately!
captain dagon, yamato.s coming!
the reflex planes are all destroyed!
that.ll be dangerous if it continues!
fire powers from the transmission centers directly!
meanwhile, prepare to fire the planet-destroying missile!
yes!
transmission centers are all over the grounds!
the source and the base should be underground somewhere!
shima, prepare to attack!
avoid the laser rays as we advance!
yes!
go!
fleet getting into battle manner!
lt.s the base!
shima, move 3 kilometers upwards!
yes!
prepare to fire wave motion canons!
yes!
prepare to fire wave motion canons!
damn yamato!
looks like they.re at a loss!
preparation for planet-destroying missiles completed!
counting down!
energy level for wave motion canons increasing!
yes!
we just came back and we.ve to fire wave motion canons again!
faster!
9, 8, 7, 6,
5, 4, 3, 2, 1
fire!
gigantic missile approaching!
protect against attacks and rays!
10, 9, 8, 7, 6,
5, 4, 3, 2, 1
fire!
enemy.s battleships have escaped!
they.ve undergone space shift!
perhaps that.s the enemy.s flagship!
don.t continue the pursuit!
father!
earth...
my son and me have returned...
returned to earth...
let.s go back!
together!
return to earth...
father!
ah!
l.m really helpless.
what?
ms yoko has collapsed?
did she catch the disease?
doctor said she should be alright.
lt.s a baby!
what?
ls she going to give birth?
we must prepare hot water!
why are you so nervous?
she.s not giving birth now!
oh?
ls it?
hahaha!
are there ways to send ms yoko to earth?
yes.
the baby must be delivered on earth!
send all female members back...
to earth!
l.m not willing to!
exploration of the minor...
planets isn.t a problem, but l never expected to be involved in a galactic war!
it would be dangerous to remain here!
kodai, l.m not willing to leave!
fearful events are occurring in space and we don.t know when we.ll have to battle with our enemies.
centauri station, earth defense force transport vessel.
yamato, hope that yourjourney is safe!
thank you.
yamato is setting off soon!
goodbye!
thank you for taking care of us!
kodai, can we really find a new earth... that can deliver babies?
yes, we will!
we will!
ln the battle at barnard star with
commander dagon, yamato ended in victory.
but the mission to search for a 2nd
earth is just too big and difficult.
yamato.s traveling towards the center of the galaxy, where galman attempts to rule.
from now till the end of all life, there.re 306 more days to go.
306 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
dagon.s new fleet counter-attacks
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
it has been 2 months since
space battleship yamato has taken in princess mariposa of planet guardiana, who is hidden in planet phantom.
yamato has investigated 132 planet systems,
but none is suitable for human survival.
now, yamato is travelling towards the last planet in the exploration zone, planet beta, of the scalageck star cluster.
we're reaching the last planet, planet beta!
this time, will we really find the 2nd earth?
we can only pray hard that we do.
as this is the last planet in the exploration zone.
battle at the scalageck star cluster
scalageck star cluster, planet @
there's detection of metal!
ah!
lsn't that the missing arizona exploration vessel?
according the cosmohound's statistics, the oxygen content in this planet is very low, thus is unsuitable for human beings.
even this place is unsuitable?
l never expect arizona's exploration vessels to meet an accident here.
kodai, it's protection battleship, alexanda!
oh?
battleship alexanda
ah!
oh?
that's serious!
was it destroyed in a battle?
analyzer, test if there is radiation in the area that was shot!
yes!
there's an extreme response!
what reaction?
analyzer!
there's detection of bolar 100!
according to earth's space migration department,
bolar 100 was also detected when
europe and africa's exploration vessels were destroyed.
so, it's the same enemy who destroyed battleship alexanda?
yes, it's the bolar federation!
why are those fellows from bolar giving us so much trouble?
they've mistaken earth as the ally of galman-gamilon.
ls that so?
there're many battleships in front of yamato, 3,000 kilometers away!
get closer faster!
alright, check the nationality of the vessels!
yes!
ryusuke, emergency!
return immediately!
yes!
prepare for battle!
lllll, what's the nationality of the fleet?
looks like galman-gamilon's fleet!
what?
galman-gamilon?
captain!
galman-gamilon flagship's call!
alright, answer it.
l'm galman-gamilon northern fleet's...
commander gustav.
l'm space battleship yamato's captain kodai.
commander gustav.
we received information that someone very important to us has boarded your vessel from planet phantom.
she's called princess mariposa.
what?
oh?
hope that you can hand princess mariposa over, or we'll enter your vessel by force.
hope that you can make a decision.
ls that desslok's idea?
ls it?
the answer is...
no!
that means it doesn't matter even if there's a battle?
l don't wish to battle, but if you attack, l have no choice.
hahaha, alright!
yuki, how're the forces of the enemy?
yes.
5 battleships, 10 small vessels, attacks are starting!
enter battle shape!
cosmo tigers, prepare to take off!
prepare to fire 2nd main cannon!
hamu!
are you around here?
yes, l can take off anytime!
silly!
you should be in charge of taking care of princess mariposa!
oh yes!
l'm sorry, captain!
l'll go back now!
princess mariposa, a war may be launched.
planet guardiana, princess mariposa.
captain ordered me to stay here!
alright.
prepare to attack yamato!
prepare gun turrets for firing!
yes!
battle with yamato within a range of 500 kilometers!
don't make a mistake!
yes!
it's a signal from general desslok!
general desslok?
transmit it to the screen!
yes!
general desslok!
gustav, l'm rushing to your side!
general, you're coming?
l'll handle princess mariposa.
no, l've received information that
bolar federation's main fleet is going towards your direction!
bolar's main fleet?
l'm sure their target is the same as ours -- princess mariposa!
l believe you also know that princess mariposa's planet guardiana had been the most powerful planet in the great milky way.
if this planet alliance with bolar federation, it'll be a hindrance to ruling space.
but the problem is whether planet guardiana really exists.
princess mariposa is the crucial person of planet guardiana!
l understand.
l'll bring her away from yamato as soon as possible.
no, you'll wait until l come!
oh?
but if bolar federation attack before that, you must protect yamato first!
yamato?
yes, you must protect yamato till your death!
understand?
yes!
damn yamato!
you're lucky!
all ships, stop attacking!
oh?
commander gustav!
bolar federation's advance troops has flown towards yamato!
what?
confirm the position of the troops!
alright!
position 295 degrees!
get closer to yamato in 60 nautical miles!
there are many of them!
damn!
turn all gun turrets towards bolar federation advance troops!
prepare to fire!
yes!
my mission is to bring princess mariposa away.
commander sergens.
or we'll destroy yamato!
oh...
what's your decision?
answer now!
l refuse to!
hahaha!
start the final attack!
yamato is 450 kilometres ahead!
cosmo tigers, take off!
prepare to deal with galman-gamilon's attacks!
yes!
oh!
princess mariposa, are you alright?
yes, thank you, l'm alright.
shima, turn right 45 degrees!
yes!
turn right 45 degrees!
nambu, fire the main cannon!
target at bolar federation advance troops that are in 400 kilometers away!
yes!
quickly, prepare to fire the main cannon!
target in 400 kilometers!
fire all gun turrets towards bolar federation advance troops!
oh?
kato, all battleships are to attack
bolar federation advance troops!
yamato is shot by 13 main cannons!
seriously damaged!
this is general desslok's order!
we must protect yamato!
lnform all ships!
all ships, stand in front of bolar federation advance troops.
final attack!
go all the way!
everyone in yamato's carrier vessel, please give way!
commander gustav, don't fool around!
captain kodai, my fleet will dash forward!
commander gustav, why battle with no tactics?
it's a pity, captain kodai!
l wish to battle yamato directly too.
don't joke!
commander gustav!
captain kodai, hope that you'll see my death!
commander gustav!
oh?
this is kato!
2,000 kilometers ahead of yamato,
bolar federation's main fleet is approaching!
what?
yuki, capture it on screen!
yes, yes!
balgayer
yamato's captain is on the line!
yes!
l'm space battleship yamato's captain kodai.
l'm main fleet's commander balgayer!
you seemed to have help from galman-gamilon in order to destroy our advance troops, but we still have abilities to battle!
l wish to know your aim of coming here!
hahaha, you're stubborn!
my main troop is 5 times the battle strength of our advance troops!
don't say anymore!
hand princess mariposa over!
you speak too much!
no matter what, the answer is no!
enough, cut the transmission!
start attacking in 10 seconds!
prepare to fire all gun turrets!
target at bolar federation main fleet that's 700 kilometers ahead!
kato, we need 10 minutes before yamato's attacking power regains.
please protect us until then!
l understand.
ah!
princess mariposa!
thank you, l'm alright.
no, we'll be attacked if this continues!
shima, turn right 45 degrees!
hide in those rocks!
yes!
turn right 45 degrees!
captain, let's use wave motion cannons!
alright, prepare to fire wave motion cannons!
ah!
the damage is worse than expected!
if this goes on, we can't even sustain for 10 minutes!
kodai!
we've no time to fire wave motion cannons!
try to get to a closer range whereby the wave motion magnetic bombs can be used!
l think so too!
we can give it a try!
shima, use the rocks to get nearer to shooting range!
yes, l understand!
prepare to fire wave motion magnetic bombs!
300 kilometres away from bolar federation's main fleet!
wave motion magnetic bombs prepared!
280 kilometres away!
250 kilometres away!
dashed through shooting range!
alright, cosmo tigers!
leave the battle line!
yes!
fire the 1st attack 30 degrees upwards!
then, dash forward and fire the 2nd attack!
lastly, attack with wave motion cannons and funnel missiles!
start now!
earth.
battle's over.
yamato can't find any suitable planet.
space does not have any planet that can be the 2nd earth.
when earth's temperature exceeds 100 degrees, human beings can only await death.
what should yamato do?
everyone hasn't given up.
we are thinking of solutions but none seems to help.
mother, guardiana, please save earth.
mother, guardiana!
mother guardiana!
mother, guardiana!
mother guardiana!
mother, guardiana, please, please save earth!
go!
go to planet guardiana.
what?
planet guardiana exists?
yes.
why don't you say earlier?
don't be like this.
l've been observing you.
l thank all of you, rather than trust.
so l wish to welcome all of you.
princess mariposa, l'll gladly accept it.
our mission to search for the 2nd earth has ended.
now, earth only awaits death.
as our last job, we'll send you back to planet guardiana.
thank you, everyone from yamato.
how do we go to planet guardiana?
we must pass through space, first, prepare space shift!
yamato, unable to find a 2nd earth, chose to leave for planet guardiana in order to guide princess mariposa back.
what would await them there?
what would be the destiny of yamato?
from now till the end of mankind, there're 51 more days.
51 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
secret of planet guardiana
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
galman empire, east forces base.
gaidel!
yes!
president desslok!
how's the battle?
yes, lt's in the process, as planned.
general, l found a beautiful planet at the edge of the galaxy, which galman can conquer 1 hour later.
oh, so that's my birthday present?
yes, the best planet to build general's mansion.
gaidel, your words really excite me!
have you received the new aircraft carrier?
yes, we have.
so your military strength should be greatly increased!
no matter what planet it is, you should be able to conquer it.
l appreciate general's kindness.
l wish you success in the battle!
call for commander dagon!
yes!
commander gaidel, l really let you down!
dagon, your failure has great impact on the battle situation!
yes!
dagon!
yes!
what's the reason for losing to yamato?
the difference between the strength of our battleships is the most deadly.
alright, l'll give you a last chance.
yes?
come and take a look!
this 17th aircraft carrier fleet is our new fleet!
oh?
dagon new fleet's attacks.
aircraft carrier.
how is it?
fine!
can we deal with yamato?
yes, we'll defeat them this time!
definitely!
but, as the battle range expanded,
desslok, whose aim is to rule the entire galaxy, hasn't realise dagon's fleet is in the process of conquering earth.
after the victory at barnard star, planet 1, yamato continues its exploration mission towards the centre of the galaxy.
passing through the asteroid!
captain, it's a sos signal!
sos?
yes, it's repeating every 3 seconds!
source of/signal from direction 350!
3,000 kilometers away!
it's very near!
alright, we'll give a helping hand!
change our direction!
yes!
weather observation spacecraft.
we're saved, thank you!
although we had heard rumours about the yamato,
captain seems to be... l'm captain kodai.
l'm space weather station's pilot captain,
please to meet you.
what had happened here?
on our way to the nearby space weather observation station, we were trapped in the space whirlpools.
although we escaped from the danger, our gears were stalled, thus trapping us here.
space whirlpools?
yes, you all better be careful!
can't radar detect space whirlpools?
actually l've news that's more serious than the space whirlpools.
days ago, we met a huge fleet from some planet.
l hope yamato can protect us, with a battleship accompanying us, we can observe the weather without worries.
yamato isn't a protection vessel!
don't you know the mission of yamato?
l'm only requesting captain...
will you protect us?
captain can't make a decision himself.
ln the meeting, please take a rest in the canteen.
l understand, awaiting your good news.
l'm yuki mori, lifestyle unit commander.
does yamato make you feel good?
members of yamato eat so much good food everyday?
don't you know the life of mankind on earth now?
this is food for our guests.
hope that you can recover.
we're certain of the danger on earth, so yamato's searching a planet for earthers to migrate to.
ls it so?
so this is the case?
l'm hungry!
pardon me!
you're welcome!
l'm hungry!
what's your name?
l'm yamato's member, hamu.
hamu?
so you are the son of jeff yong?
yes.
l know your father.
so jeff's son is in yamato!
you must become a successful warrior!
yes.
are you protecting that spacecraft?
l disagree!
but, l'm concerned that they met a huge fleet.
kodai, our mission is to find a new earth as soon as possible!
if we're interrupted by ambiguous information, we won't fulfill our missions!
captain, we're sorry.
we can't help you.
l know your mission, l'm sorry to put you through this.
although l've heard of rumours about yamato, it's indeed a great battleship for saving the crisis!
do your best!
reparations of the spacecraft is completed, we'll protect you on the way.
it's dangerous for you to waste more time on yourjourney!
just go!
yes!
but, what l said about meeting a fleet isn't a lie, please be careful!
yes!
thank you for your care!
yamato right?
the youths' battleship carrying mankind's wishes...
space weather observation station
check the statistics!
yes!
electric currents and magnetic fields are fine!
great!
oh?
looks like it's the spacecraft that met yamato.
if we destroy this observation station,
yamato will definitely come!
bait to lure yamato?
prepare to attack!
yes!
captain?
enemy!
contact yamato!
transmit sos!
not sos!
their target is yamato!
lnform them about the enemy's presence.
never let yamato come here!
yes!
captain, it's from the observation station.
can yamato hear this?
we've discovered the fleet of the enemy!
leave the asteroid immediately!
can yamato hear this?
please...
gone!
ls that spacecraft attacked?
why didn't they transmit sos?
suspicious, go over immediately!
captain, escape using the spacecraft!
it's useless!
damn!
yamato!
let's escape!
the observation station has been destroyed.
that planet is?
it's an asteroid, planet 154.
transmit to the screen!
seems to be that captain's spacecraft.
are we late?
on the asteroid, planet 154...
confirm that there're no survivors.
alright!
that spacecraft is...
let's search!
yes!
anybody?
boo hoo hoo...
oh?
here!
captain, brace up!
oh?
you're hamu !
yes, l'm here to save you.
hamu, the child l knew has grown up and become very courageous... lnform captain kodai!
yamato, quick search for a 2nd earth!
quick...
please brace up!
captain!
yamato appeared as expected!
start our 1st round of attacks here, as we attack, we'll lure them to cygnus to destroy them!
it's the enemy!
enemy discovered upfront!
what?
transmit it to the screen!
15,000 kilometers away!
divide battleships into group a and b!
spread out towards right and left!
hamu, command group a. prepare to battle!
yes!
this is yamato!
kato's team, attack!
yes!
hamu 's group a, prepare to attack!
we are prepared!
just watch it!
damn!
ah!
enemy has retreated!
no, they won't give up so easily!
they'll attack the 2nd and 3rd round!
cosmo tigers, return for a refuel!
yes!
enemy has started on their 2nd attack!
what?
that's fast!
we won't be able to take it!
we won't have time to refuel!
shima, prepare space shift!
use space shift to leave this area!
yes!
damn!
faster!
counting down 15 seconds before space shift!
everyone, fasten your safety belts!
what?
so noisy!
fasten my safety belt?
oh, ok!
counting down!
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1.
ah!
the gear room on the right of the vessel has been shot!
what?
l'll be there immediately!
stop space shift!
gear department has some problems, we can't undergo space shift!
ls it the control panel?
which part has problems?
we're not sure yet!
find out quickly!
yes!
kodai, we're being chased to cygnus!
what?
there're space whirlpools near cygnus!
cygnus?
transmit it to the screen!
that is it!
the space whirlpools!
kodai, with yamato's power, we should be able to cross the space whirlpools!
right, we shall escape from the enemy fleet in this manner!
yes!
yamato's escaping!
escape to the skies of cygnus!
we've discovered massive space tornadoes!
they're traveling at high speeds here!
tornadoes?
transmit it to the screen!
each one has a diameter of more than 10 kilometers!
captain, we'll be ripped into pieces if we are trapped in the tornado!
commander yamasaki, is the gear department fully repaired?
l'm sorry, l've yet to find out the reason for the breakdown!
be faster!
yamato crossed into the paths of the space turbulence to avoid dagon's fleet's attacks.
now, the space tornadoes are gradually getting nearer to the battleship.
can yamato escape this massive turbulence?
from now till the end of all life, there're 285 more days to go.
285 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
yamato faces danger at cygnus
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato
is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
arrival at galman-gamilon.
they received a warm welcome there.
but quite a number of yamato's members do not trust desslok.
then, a parade was held for the 1st year of setting up of galman empire.
new weapons were introduced one after another.
that was the fearful ceremony to show galman-gamilon's utmost strength.
the next day.
desslok.
kodai, it's great that you came.
l never expected to step onto the deck of yamato again.
1st captain, captain juhzoh okita.
juhzoh's a brilliant captain.
kodai, why did yamato take off from earth?
you really didn't hear of any reports?
when your fleet was battling against berth's fleet, a stray missile hit our sun,
causing nuclear fusion to increase tremendously in the sun.
all lifeforms on earth will die in 1 year's time.
thus, we came to this faraway
milky way to find a 2nd earth to migrate to.
we are left with 6 months only.
ls that so?
l didn't know.
but, kodai, before searching for a
2nd earth, can't the sun be controlled?
of course we had tried using all sorts of technology, but we failed.
this time, let me handle the job!
sorry for being rude, but our technology is more advance than earth's.
l'll be able to control your sun.
and we must do it now.
talan, contact major frausky to prepare to start work!
yes.
kodai, l'll take my leave first.
hold on, desslok!
l appreciate your kindness... lt's not kindness!
we're making up for our mistake!
what do you think?
alright, technology on this planet is rather high, l disagree!
l don't want desslok's help!
earth should be saved by us!
l disagree too!
desslok isn't such a person!
l believe in him!
l believe in him too,
desslok's making up for his subordinates' mistakes sincerely.
he's full of vigour, just like us.
l agree with yuki.
no matter who we seek for help, saving the earth is our priority!
captain, shouldn't we return to our work craft to confirm the way to control the sun, after making a decision?
let's do that!
at that time, near the
bolar federation frontline base.
that's galman's newly invented space shift missile.
even the satellites of
galman-gamilon can't detect it.
planet gamilon, space airport.
work craft for control of sun.
technology major frausky, yamato's captain kodai and deputy sanada are here.
technology major frausky.
president desslok has already told me.
l'm frausky.
l'm kodai.
we'll count on you this time.
l'll control the sun, for the reputation of president desslok and our empire.
l'll explain the way of controlling.
please come here.
this is the sun, and the earth.
first, we'll fix devices around the sun's heat-preventive region...
earth
space migration headquarters.
after confirming the way to control the sun and using the technology here, according to mr sanada, the success rate is nearly 99º% .
ls it?
if sanada has confirmed it, it can't be wrong.
yes, 5 work crafts will prepare to set off towards the east soon.
l understand, our earth will also prepare to accept this.
thank you.
on the work crafts, sanada and his 5 subordinates and communication officer showara will go together.
understood.
relay my appreciation to desslok!
yes, l understand that.
showara will return to earth.
earth's officer kato also appreciates your kindness.
ls it?
earth trusts your technology totally, we hope that you'll succeed.
l'm honoured.
desslok.
desslok, why don't you use those technology on peace?
what?
now that gamilon's rebuilt, why use military powers to attack faraway planets?
it's to maintain peace in space!
look at the space map!
bolar federation's range of authority is wide, so is their military power.
and they're aiming to rule the space.
l've to protect this planet from bolar federation.
not only that, when l've unified space, all planets in the milky way will be peaceful.
president desslok, sun-workcraft is prepared to take off anytime.
great!
4th defense zone detected missiles.
confirmed to be bolar missiles.
they couldn't have broken into our defense zone!
there's nothing wrong with the defense zone!
since bolar is attacking us, we can't hesitate anymore.
kodai, this is the reality!
but our defense system is perfect!
detected enemy's 2nd wave of missiles!
one of them is approaching!
too late!
why wasn't the defense system for this zone activated?
this is terrible!
the control system on the main computer is destroyed!
how's the damage of the airport?
there's no problem!
alright, take off!
kodai, you must trust our defense power.
l understand.
we're going to the airport too.
send the battleships to set out now!
remain in the state of battle!
yes!
stop running!
traitor!
stop!
ah!
starsha...
mother starsha...
they're the culprits who destroyed the computer.
there're guardiana's worshippers on this planet too.
sir, please take refuge in the underground palace!
talan, do you think l, as the president, can leave this place?
the attacks are intense!
if this goes on, we won't be able to sustain!
mr sanada, if we succeed in controlling the sun,
yamato's mission will be completed.
we count on you!
just wait.
you must work hard too.
yes!
we'll take off now.
ls the defense system repaired?
l'm sorry, guardiana's destruction was more serious than we thought.
l'll need 30 more minutes.
detected 3rd wave of missiles!
it's a giant one!
what?
it's the planet-destroying missile!
it's reaching here in 180 seconds!
attack them!
yes!
our battleship will take off as a protective workcraft!
preparation for takeoff completed!
enemy's giant missile approaching!
oh?
start the wave motion engine!
connect to wheels!
yamato, take off!
no!
our defense network's broken into!
president!
yamato!
the missile is even closer now.
are you calling me?
ryusuke, you'll fire the wave motion canon in my place!
what?
my injury has yet to heal!
now, you're the most trustworthy one.
come, help captain pull the handle of the wave motion canon!
yes!
l'll do it!
prepare to fire wave motion canon!
yes!
wave motion canon 92º% recharged!
wave motion canon 100º% recharged!
open the target device!
remove the final safety lock!
prepare to fire wave motion canon!
target the planet-destroying missile!
calm down!
ryusuke!
captain, it's be better to just destroy that planet...
fool!
mr sanada and another are in the workcraft behind!
if galman-gamilon is destroyed, the workcraft would be affected too!
starting to countdown!
avoid impacts and rays!
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1!
fire!
good work!
that's the accurate way to fire!
captain!
yes.
yes, l've succeeded!
l've succeeded!
success!
hahaha!
president!
yamato...
yamato saved this planet!
talan, call for kodai!
yes!
kodai, you've done a great job.
galman-gamilon is saved by you!
l really thank you.
desslok, don't get it wrong!
l only wanted to save the workcraft!
this is for saving earth!
your defense network isn't perfect!
l hope you'll understand from now that over-confidence is more dangerous than military powers.
think carefully!
desslok!
yamato saved galman-gamilon, and saw the workcraft off with full passion.
will the control of the sun be successful?
from now till the end of life, there's only 182 more days to go.
182 more days to the end of mankind.
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
ah!
still breathing, it's just body paralysis.
ls it?
so that's shock gun!
oh?
hear this, don't move!
l'll kill you if you move a step!
just shoot, l won't let you succeed!
stop!
where are you trying to go?
to our sacred planet, planet guardiana!
planet guardiana?
gear room's taken over!
we've no choice, follow their orders.
you mean we've to surrender?
even if we pretend to agree and take off, once we're in space, it's our world!
we'll take care of things there.
but it's dangerous!
captain!
prisoners invaded the vessel from the exit of the gear room!
we witness a total of 70 to 80 prisoners!
their weapons are only shock guns.
what?
shock guns?
so our lives are not endangered.
good, we'll use shock guns to battle them as well!
captain!
they want to go to planet guardiana!
planet guardiana?
planet guardiana's a sacred planet full of love for space!
we must inform queen guardiana about the chaos in space!
take off now!
if you don't follow orders, we'll destroy the gear room!
what's the position of planet guardiana?
we'll bring you there if it's not far away!
we also don't know it's position!
this vessel can withstand any journeys no matter how long it takes.
don't joke!
this is an order!
take off in 5 minutes time!
captain, we've seen queen guardiana.
what?
seen the queen?
yamato, which is continuing its mission to search for a minor planet, anchored at berth, a planet 1,500 kilometers away from earth.
berth is a stellar prison of the huge galactic nation, bolar federation.
while prisoners were forced to work vigorously, they believed in the goddess-cum- saviour-like queen of the legendary planet guardiana.
religion in the centre of the milky way.
ls it a good decision to search for peace on planet guardiana?
planet berth defense commander balkam.
l'm sorry to cause the trouble.
we'll deal with them personally.
no, it's our fleet, we'll make them disarm.
l understand.
captain, if upfront attack result them to destroy the gear room, it'll be disastrous!
chase the prisoners from the sides.
what should we do?
under the boards of the carrier vessel's cabin, there's a emergency route for means of checking.
get into the gear room from there.
ls it?
l understand now.
alright, go!
please let us go too!
alright, prepare shock guns!
it's here.
it's already 5 minutes and they're not taking off yet.
destroy the gear room totally!
yes!
damn!
ah!
captain!
ah!
tokugawa!
don't worry, it's just a shock gun.
shock gun?
those scoundrels!
how dare they trick me!
your armament possessions will be removed soon.
we're on a huge mission.
it's a pity that we can't heed your requests.
you'll be handed to the defense force.
l've pleaded with them for leniency.
don't worry.
thank you for your help.
lnform general to deal with them with leniency.
l'll inform him.
although they were wrong, l sympathize their motives.
bolar federation fleet.
bolar federation's prime minister bemlaze received news from galman empire
east forces about the destruction of berth's fleet.
thus, he made a visit to planet berth.
galman empire and bolar federation are are the 2 major powers splitting the milky way into half.
but their authorities are gradually getting weaker.
bolar federation, prime minister bemlaze.
they've destroyed our fleet boldly.
this is not only the disgrace of bolar
federation, it's also a challenge to bolar federation.
we must learn a lesson from the destruction of the berth fleet.
we've to shatter their ambitions.
prisoners revolting?
yes, guardiana prisoners on berth has escaped.
l'm the lord of space.
execute all of them!
yes!
galman empire.
on the other hand, galman empire is also holding a meeting on the
everyone, the conquer by the 2 armies on the milky way will reach its goal in the early stage.
our battle with our greatest enemy, bolar federation, is approaching.
ln order to try out bolar federation's strength, we've attacked berth's fleet
and we destroyed them easily.
although we can't under-estimate our enemies based on this, we also need not feel threatened.
if we don't defeat bolar, we can't rule the milky way.
not to say, gaining victory.
thus l want to hear battle strategies from all of you.
before that, president, l've a report to make.
what is it?
l discovered that there's something going on among the guardiana followers in galman empire.
oh?
if they start a revolt before the battle with bolar federation, they'll influence other guardiana
followers in the milky way, giving them a big chance to win the battle.
and the person is...
general!
what happened to you?
mother guardiana!
the legendary guardiana used to have a queen guardiana who had immense
influence on the milky way and brought peace and love to all planets.
although her powers have weakened, the faith towards the queen never
faded and there're followers everywhere.
this general is one of them.
we don't need this kind of people in galman empire.
let's continue our meeting!
powerful fleet.
bolar federation's prime minister bemlaze is inside, just contacted by the general.
they were the ones who permitted our anchor, we must interview him!
l don't wish to interview the nation that conquered this planet.
this is needed out of courtesy.
let mr sanada and me go.
showara from 1st vessel bridge and
kato from cosmo tigers will be going along as well.
captain, take a look!
damn!
that's too much!
kato, make an emergency landing!
alright!
fire!
defense commander, stop the execution!
please don't interfere!
these are our prisoners!
this is not what you promised!
didn't you plead for leniency?
l did.
but he changed his mind.
why?
it's prime minister bemlaze's order!
prime minister bemlaze?
l'm yamato's captain kodai, from earth defense force and
deputy sanada and medical officer doctor sado.
we're here to show our respect to prime minister bemlaze.
it's a fine time that you came, l've heard about legendra, l wish to thank all of you.
while we were held hostage, we pleaded for a lenient treatment.
those prisoners have broken the laws of bolar federation!
execution is inevitable!
you all should not interfere!
but we, from yamato, were victims too.
we should have a say in dealing with the prisoners.
what would you do if you were me?
l would set them free.
kodai, don't speak nonsense!
l can't break the promise l made to the prisoners.
captain kodai, are you going against me?
against you?
yes, everyone sees legendra as partners, which means you'll give in to bolar federation.
don't joke!
it's the 1st time l've heard that we're part of the bolar federation.
we never intended to!
it wasn't easy for prime minister to treat you all as partners!
for the independence of earth, you betterjoin our forces!
earth can remain independent without joining bolar federation!
so you're going against us!
it's you who's going against us!
general balsky, the time's up!
capture these silly people!
then capture yamato!
prime minister bemlaze!
those who go against me can't stay in space!
general balsky
defense army, gather up!
what?
what happened?
ah!
captain!
general residence.
ah!
he's really confident!
he didn't even think of our situation.
showara, contact shima!
yes!
this is yamato!
what?
l'm kodai, we're battling with the defense soldiers of bolar federation.
send 2 cosmo tigers to free the prisoners near the general residence.
yes, send them for cover immediately.
hamu, send 2 cosmo tigers out!
yes!
yuki, control the cosmohound!
yes!
it's there!
go!
prepare!
oh?
ah!
that's captain!
cover them as we land!
ah!
oh?
sorry, it's our chance to review our troops, plus the attacks by galman
empire fleet, both your failure must be serious!
you must be prepared to be fully responsible.
yes!
you'll destroy yamato yourself!
don't let it escape this planet!
captain!
faster!
kato!
you'll control the special exploration craft!
yes!
don't let that plane escape!
prepare to fire missiles!
fire!
attack yamato!
shima, all have landed safely!
prepare to take off!
we're prepared!
yamato, take off!
start the canon attacks!
only 3 ships in the attacking fleet are left!
l don't wish to see this disgusting planet anymore!
fire the planetary missiles!
destroy yamato along with the planet!
shima, let's go back one more time!
for what?
save those prisoners!
we can't leave them there!
oh?
the enemy fleet has fired planetary missiles!
they're 15 kilometers away!
damn!
shima, make an emergency reverse!
full speed!
emergency reverse 70 degrees to the right!
ah!
imagine them destroying their partners with such weapons!
they're too much!
this is the true identity of bolar federation!
we're really sorry to the prisoners!
everyone on yamato!
you've fought very well!
but l know you're our enemy!
we'll let you off this time, but next time, we will be merciless!
prime minister bemlaze, l've never seen anyone as cruel as you!
l'll never forget my anger this time!
hahaha, your words make me feel good!
l anticipate to meet you again!
hahaha!
the new enemy, bolar federation.
when would they deal with yamato?
from now till the end of life, there's only 227 more days to go.
227 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
subspace submarine captain:
galman wolf
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
planet phantom.
it's confirmed that planet phantom is the living body of space.
phantom will emit ultimate energy powers, making earthers see it as earth
and galman-gamilons to see it as planet galman-gamilon.
farewell planet phantom
hamu and ryusuke haven't been found?
it's a pity, they can't be found anywhere.
should we fire a bomb in?
stupid, if we do that, what would happen to them?
damn, what should we do?
hey!
where're you going?
oh?
ah!
what?
ah!
oh?
mr hamu!
ryusuke!
welcome!
don't be shocked!
l'm the living body of planet phantom!
why did you bring us here?
you are brought here because l wish to put princess mariposa in your care!
oh?
that's princess mariposa?
ls she the princess of this planet?
no, she's not our princess!
we took her in!
princess mariposa is the heir of planet guardiana!
planet guardiana?
the planet that guardiana worshippers are looking for?
yes!
that's shocking!
mother guardiana's planet really exists?
it exists!
where?
only princess mariposa knows the secret!
but, why hand her to us?
it's not alright for her to stay here?
yes, bolar federation and
galman-gamilon also know my existence!
princess mariposa will be in danger if she stays here, so l hope that you can take care of her!
when you landed here, you valued the grass and the flowers,
you are kind people, thus you are the most suitable people to look after princess mariposa.
showara, send signals to plane phantom!
oh?
if that's the living body of space, it'd probably understand my language.
yes!
the content of the signal is as such:
calling for planet phantom!
please let me know the whereabouts of hamu and ryusuke!
yes!
hold on!
look there!
what?
it's hamu and ryusuke!
and a lady!
alright, send an emergency vessel out!
emergency vessel setting off!
hey, this way!
emergency vessel reporting!
ryusuke and hamu are taken in along with a lady!
great!
alright, return now!
yes, return now!
l'll do the introducing.
she's princess mariposa from planet guardiana.
planet guardiana's princess?
l'm yamato's captain kodai.
l'm yamato's assistant captain sanada.
l'm lifestyle unit's yuki mori.
why is planet guardiana's princess in planet phantom?
princess mariposa is protected by planet phantom.
protected?
years ago, princess mariposa was sent to the exile lands of planet phantom by bemlaze of bolar federation.
exile lands?
well, in the eyes of people from bolar federation,
planet phantom becomes a nation formed by ice, perhaps, the best place to be the exile lands.
but in fact, she was protected by the warm natural environments of planet phantom.
as such, she had to hide herself up.
alright!
l understand, we'll talk about the details later.
please take a rest.
yuki, counting on you.
yes.
and also, hamu!
l order you to protect princess mariposa from now on.
sure!
so, let's find a new planet!
prepare to leave!
set off!
what a friendly planet!
we actually view it as earth!
damn, it'd be great if it was the 2nd earth!
earth
there're battleships approaching from the top-right corner!
switch on the screen!
it's the galman-gamilon fleet!
galman-gamilon?
why did desslok send his fleet here?
what happened?
ms mori.
you can speak our language.
planet phantom is in danger.
it'll be attacked by the fleet of galman-gamilon.
how do you know?
hamu!
yes!
tell captain kodai that planet phantom will be attacked by galman-gamilon.
what?
l understand!
commander gustav.
prepare to fire planet-destroying missiles!
target at planet phantom!
prepare to fire planet-destroying missiles!
target at planet phantom!
captain!
what's the matter?
we heard that galman-gamilon fleet is attacking planet phantom, please send orders to stop the attack!
damn, how can this be?
showara, contact the flagship of galman-gamilon fleet!
yes!
planet-destroying missiles prepared!
great.
commander!
space battleship yamato's emergency call!
yamato?
alright, answer it!
yes!
l'm kodai from space battleship yamato!
we're requesting the commander of
galman-gamilon's fleet to stop attacking planet phantom.
stop attacking?
yes, l'll repeat my request again, planet phantom isn't the kind of planet you are thinking about.
it's a very...
cut the call!
yes!
dreadful yamato!
gamilon fleet!
please stop the attacks!
gamilon fleet!
hahaha,
gamilon fleet!
fire the planet-destroying missiles!
oh?
the missiles are fired!
what?
nambu, prepare to fire 3rd and standby cannons!
prepare to fire 3rd and standby cannons!
3rd and standby cannons prepared!
fire!
no!
earth is destroyed!
earth...!
ah!
desslok...
damn...
the same planet-destroying missiles that killed my parents!
mercury.
planet galman-gamilon.
ls it kodai?
desslok, why did you pass such a lawless order?
lawless order?
why did you destroy planet phantom?
it's not necessary!
not really, kodai!
why?
brought shame to galman-gamilon!
it's not only that!
it also made a fool of you and all members of yamato!
l can't forgive it!
desslok!
kodai!
desslok has his pride too!
well, it can't be undone now!
l'll search for a new earth!
right, kodai!
let's go, captain!
captain!
now, our vessel will set off again in search for a new earth!
yes!
yamato, set off in full speed!
bolar federation
what?
princess mariposa?
yes, planet guardiana's princess that prime minister had sent to planet phantom years ago.
l remember!
planet phantom was a piece of exile land!
but, it unbelievable that the princess is still alive!
what can we do?
if it's the truth, it would tarnish the reputation of bolar federation!
sergens, send out the 8th attacking fleet to track yamato down and make a check.
if that person is princess mariposa, request them to hand her over!
yes!
l'll send bolar federation's
1st and 2nd main fleet to give aid!
tell gosafus, understand?
yes!
l'll send our 1st and 2nd main fleet out now!
general, harmeyai is returning from his investigation mission from planet phantom!
planet phantom?
this is making me unhappy.
sorry, but there's something worth paying attention to.
what is it?
before planet phantom was attacked, princess mariposa seemed to have boarded yamato.
what?
princess mariposa?
yes, although l've yet to confirm it, but it seems like it.
why didn't you say earlier?
ricci!
lnform northern fleet commander gustav to confirm it!
alright!
that's it.
l understand.
if yamato refuses, we'll attack.
l'm counting on you.
yes.
ls it yamato?
hahaha, it's definitely fit to be my opponent!
turn back!
set off at full speed!
yamato has yet to realise that...
bolar federation and galman-gamilon are sending fleets to go after them.
yamato is on its way to find a new planet.
hahaha.
but yamato has yet to realise that.
from now till the end of mankind, there're 111 more days.
111 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
battle at the scalageck star cluster
__file_terminal__
the yamato is about to execute a warp jump
to reach the central planet of the galman empire
ready, 10 seconds to warp jump 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, jump
jump completed
the starforce
during their research mission to find a new earth in outer space
have been attacked by spaceships of galman's
but the ruler of this empire, the supreme desslok was informed of this and apologizes to wildstar
and invites him to come over to galman central planet
derek, this is desslok's empire, isn't it ?
i think so
desslok is nearby
i did not believe we could find it
in the year 2199
the earth was attacked by planet bombs launched by gamilon
a mysterious planet in outer space
the radioactive fallout from these bombs was leading mankind to total annihilation
starsha, queen of the planet iscandar 148,000 light-years away from earth
saved humanity from the imminent disaster
the space cruiser yamato, the first spaceship of earth
capable of traveling at higher than light speeds
departed on the way to iscandar
its mission was to acquire the cosmo dna, a radioactive cleaning device
but before reaching the planet
the yamato was assailed by gamilon warships
and the starforce in order to save themselves had to face the gamilons on their planet
radar readings:
missiles all around
space batteries, fire at will
the wave motion engine has been hit
mark, we need to get out of here as soon as possible
it's risky but we have to try
full thrust ahead
so they were able to defeat desslok
and to save humanity
but when it came the time to fight against the comet empire
who wanted to subject the whole universe to its evil power
desslok chose to be on our side
yes it is true, i have fought against the yamato but now i am ashamed of myself
that evil comet empire has a single purpose
to invade and plunder other planets
my way of thinking is much closer to the terrestrial
wildstar, remember our battle on gamilon?
your first win
uhm, you were very brave
i salute you, i hope we meet each other again
so desslok made a very long space trip
in order to found a new empire
an empire to honor his beloved memories of gamilon planet, which is now uninhabitable
gamilon
oh goodness, our gamilon planet has disappeared forever
i knew from the beginning that it was doomed
it had to perish
but i wished i had not witnessed its end with my own eyes
even iscandar
starsha's planet, gamilon companion was doomed
forever lost in space
drifting in space after the destruction of gamilon
but wildstar and desslok
had met each other during the battle against the black nebula empire
shoot!
don't be concerned for me
i can't desslok
the only option is to strike the goruba thru here
only then we will be able to defeat him
hurry!
wildstar don't hesitate you have to shoot
there's no doubt about it
starsha must be saved
wave motion gun, ready to fire
but at that moment, starsha intervened
and put an end to the space battle
risking her own life
desslok
what are your plans now ?
i want to honor gamilon's former glory by rebuilding its empire
but my world is now gone forever
iscandar is also lost
desslok, please
you should not worry about me
i'll find another planet
a new world
no matter for how long i have to roam through the universe
but i know that i have to achieve my dream
yes, desslok
you've made your dream come true
commander
what's up ?
why have you accepted the invitation, sir ?
we are enemies, sir
both the gamilon empire and now the galman empire
have repeatedly attacked the yamato
and we have suffered too many casualties
don't reproach the commander
desslok feels guilty
that is why we were invited
it's true that desslok tried to invade the earth once
but then he had his reasons
he had to fight for his dying planet
for the good of his people
he had to find another planet
just like us
but if so
why the same man continues to be the cause of interplanetary wars ?
i too want to know the answer to this question
that is why i have accepted this invitation
the central planet, sir
twin planets
they look like gamilon and iscandar
the yamato is approaching
welcome wildstar
i am pleased to see you after so long
this planet has a twin
just like iscandar and gamilon
i named that planet starsha
starsha
you can understand why
starsha saved my life in the battle against the autostar goruba
so i pay my respect to her by calling that planet her name
planet starsha
yes!
the yamato has arrived on this planet
wildstar and nova are here
seeing them again reminds me of you
starsha, angel of peace
i will be forever grateful to you
nova, i recognized you from the sound of your steps
you and wildstar have made me understand what true love is
i remember when fighting against you
at the side of the comet empire
shoot wildstar
derek
derek, derek, oh my love, my love
you made me understand something very important
although basically i did everything for the good of gamilon
it made me feel really happy
that was my world, in the midst of violence
blood
but i was just a man
who was never been able to understand what true love really is
i will be eternally grateful for what happened then
thanks to you, now i can understand many things
desslok, i have not yet congratulated you
right, but if you want to give me a real gift you should celebrate with me
the first anniversary of the founding of galman empire
of course, greetings for the your first anniversary
thanks, derek
there's something i'd like to know
how did you manage to achieve such an enormous empire
in such a short time ?
please friends, sit down
indeed, reproducing gamilon on this planet was undoubtedly not an easy undertaking
now i'll tell you the whole story
after we went our separate ways
at the end of the battle against black nebulans i left for a long journey
it seemed that desslok's trek would go on forever
wandering with his fleet into the heart of the galactic cloud
what a surprised when before us we found two other twin planets
very similar to what gamilon and iscandar used to be
one of the two planets was called galman, where lived a people
which had originated the inhabitants of gamilon
indeed long before
ancestors of gamilon had emigrated from galman
towards the magellanic cloud where they had founded gamilon
therefore, galman was the real world home of desslok and the gamilons
but his people was held prisoner by the bolar federation
that considered them as slaves
after a long and fierce battle
desslok was able to release galman from bolar's hold
afterwards, desslok's fleet succeeded in freeing other planets
that were in this part of the galaxy
the influence of the bolar federation was totally eliminated from this area of space
after freeing galman
desslok renamed the planet galman-gamilon
an he became the emperor
long live the great desslok, long live the great desslok
long live the great desslok,
wildstar was very impressed by the wealth and military power of galman
and he also fears that this can lead desslok to attempt to conquer the entire universe
will their friendship hold up to such an occurrence ?
and remain steadfast for long?
if their friendship were to end, what would happen to wildstar and the starforce?
he feels very confused by all these niggling issues.
one cannot forget that humanity has only 183 days left of life
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
count down 10 seconds to space shift!
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1, 0!
space shift!
festive day for desslok
space shift completed!
yes?
travelling towards the centre of the milky way,
the yamato had been fiercely attacked by galman.
president desslok, who was kept in the dark, apologized to kodai personally
and even welcomed yamato to galman empire.
kodai, this is desslok's...?
yes.
he's in space.
desslok, l never thought of meeting you again.
it's in the year 2199.
earth had been attacked by meteor bombs from the mysterious planet, gamilon.
as the radiation was polluted, earth was facing extinction.
the milky way, which was 14,000 light years away from earth
ient a helping earth to earth.
ln black nebula.
queen starsha of lscandar.
earth's 1st high speed battleship,
space battleship yamato, set off to lscandar to obtain the radiation removal device.
before reaching the destination,
yamato got involved with a battle with gamilon's president desslok.
it fell into the trap and was pulled into planet gamilon.
missile approaching!
it's a gigantic one!
open all gun turrets!
battle!
3rd gun turret seriously damaged!
shima, travel in full speed!
dash into the heart of the enemy!
go!
yamato won desslok and earth was saved.
but not long after that, in the battle with the evil
white comet empire, that's near earth,
desslok became yamato's partner.
compared to their ambitious attitudes,
my inner self is closer to earthers.
kodai, do you still remember the battle on gamilon?
directly above and directly below.
hahaha!
it's only weak stuff.
goodbye, one day, we'll meet again!
after that, desslok started navigation to build a new nation.
after bidding farewell to gamilon and starsha,
gamilon...
our planet vanished...
though the planet's destruction was pre-destined, it actually had to face such a cruel fate.
after losing gamilon's gravitational force, lscandar drifted off its course and started to move all around.
thus kodai and desslok formed an alliance and battled against the comet empire.
automatic planet
kodai, shoot with me!
desslok...?
the enemy's main attacking area is here!
other than attacking here, there's no other ways.
what're you doing?
quick open fire!
l hope you understand... l love starsha...
prepare to fire wave motion canons!
at that time, starsha sacrificed herself to stop the space tragedy.
desslok!
what do you plan to do in future?
l had wanted to make gamilon prosper,
but now that gamilon's gone,
lscandar no longer exists.
desslok!
don't worry!
l'll find a new planet in future.
there are many of them in space.
yes, you've achieved your dream.
but...
captain!
you?
why did you accept desslok's invitation?
we disagree!
galman empire had battled against us numerous times and we sacrificed many of our men!
don't reproach captain!
desslok welcomed us because he felt he was in the wrong too.
he did try to invade earth, but he has his reasons.
he battled for the nearly-destroyed planet and people.
since that's the case, why did desslok start wars all around space?
yes, l accepted the invitation as l wanted to know the answer!
it's the planet!
oh?
ls it a 2-in-1 planet?
it looks totally like black nebula's
gamilon and lscandar!
yamato's here!
kodai's here!
ever since that last battle, we've never met.
this planet's also 2 stars into 1.
l named it starsha.
starsha?
queen of lscandar.
the starsha who saved our lives.
l was in love with lscandar.
so you changed that planet's name?
yes.
starsha, yamato is here.
kodai and yuki too.
l suddenly miss you a lot after meeting them.
starsha, you're always the one l miss the most.
yuki.
from the sound of your footsteps, immediately, l know it's you.
yuki, l see true love from kodai and you.
that was when l seeked refuge at the comet, battling yamato.
shoot, kodai!
yes, kodai!
kodai?
you'll be alright.
what was the object you showed me just now?
although l said it was for gamilon, l had survived till now for the
beauty of destruction and violence.
l'm really lonely, in my eyes, there's nothing l love.
if l have something that l love, it would be starsha.
desslok, l've yet to wish you a happy birthday.
no, compared to that, you should celebrate the 1st year anniversary of galman-gamilon.
oh yes, congratulations on the 1st year anniversary of your nation.
thank you.
come to think of it, it's quite a feat... for you to build such a huge nation in such a short time.
yes, it wasn't easy to rebuild gamilon.
after the battle with comet empire, after bidding farewell to you, l found myself on a long journey.
it seemed to be an endless journey.
but when l stepped into the centre of the milky way, l discovered the 2-in-1 planet.
galman people were living on that planet.
those galmans were the ancestral... race of the gamilons.
their ancestors moved from this planet to black nebula, building gamilon.
gamilon was their ancestor's planet.
but galmans were ruled by bolar
federation and became prisoners.
after long and tough battles,
desslok obtained galman's rule from bolar federation and started big battles in the center of the milky way,
liberating all surrounding planets.
bolar federation's authority was totally driven out.
after the liberation, desslok changed the planet's name to galman-gamilon, and was elected as president.
long live desslok!
long live galman-gamilon empire!
long live desslok!
long live galman-gamilon empire!
kodai was confused as he looked at the soldiers.
with the empire's aggressive strength and military powers,
desslok, in fact has the ambitions to conquer the space.
can this friendship continue?
what could happen if the friendship shatters?
kodai's rather confused.
from now till the end of life, there's only 183 more days to go.
183 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
desslok's empire in a crisis
__file_terminal__
space cruiser yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
yamato.s flying towards the center of the milky way, in search for a 2nd earth.
ln the milky way, a galactic war is unfolding.
commander dagon of galman empire is attacking earth after conquering planet berth.
he disregards captain kodai.s words.
galman empire fleet, commander dagon.
together with planet berth.s legendra in the territories of earth,
yamato has started it.s battle.
yamato is involved in the galactic war without a choice.
fire the main canon!
planet berth fleet, legendra.
come on!
attack!
territory of planet brumas.
earth defense force headquarters.
officer, yamato is battling its enemy in the territories of planet brumas as of 1510.
although l wish to prevent the war, that.s invasion of territory, we don.t have a choice.
at the beginning of the 23rd century, nuclear fusion in the sun suddenly increased incredibly.
if that goes on, living things can.t live on earth.
3 years later, earth will undergo supernova and be destroyed.
haha, if we destroy legendra, planet berth will belong to me!
then, go all the way towards earth, don.t slow down!
open all the canon doors!
final attack!
ah!
route s is shot!
area 35 is on fire!
take care of the casualties!
ok!
hey!
what are you doing?
senior, what are you doing?
hand these jobs to the medical unit!
you still have important work in the kitchen.
come back!
yes!
l understand your feelings, but if everyone does not remain in their positions, we.ll never win.
sorry.
ah!
captain!
captain, please brace up!
now, the enemies are backing out!
lt.s time to undergo space shift!
escape!
nonsense!
now, who is earth fighting for?
if you.re a warrior of berth, you must fight till your last breath!
yes, l understand.
ah!
commander dagon!
what.s going on?
l.m sorry, please come to the vessel bridge.
the frontline fleet has problems battling the carrier ship of yamato.
carrier ship of yamato?
when can you become a good commander?
to be at wits. end facing that old battleship?
30 minutes have past after the main attack!
sorry.
we should bring in the aircraft carrier.
open the canon doors of the high pressure canons!
destroy them!
we.re warriors of galman empire fleet.
we can.t lose in this battle!
yes!
prepare high pressure canons!
captain, captain ram.s on the line!
transmit it to the screen!
yes!
captain ram?
captain kodai and everyone in yamato and on earth, we sincerely thank you
for helping us.
sad to say, legendra.s badly damaged.
we can.t continue our battle, we can.t even continue ourjourney.
we can.t take it lying that we have to
leave the battle, but we.ve put in our best as warriors.
please understand.
of course, captain ram.
we respect you.
thank you, captain kodai.
goodbye, everyone in yamato!
captain!
yes?
lnform all battleships, we.ve completed our mission.
return immediately!
yes!
commander dagon, the canons are ready!
good, legendra is dealt with already.
after destroying yamato, we.ll go towards earth.
20 seconds before launch of high pressure canons!
lnform all members on board!
prepare to attack!
yamato will rise up 2,000 kilometers up the sky then turn back temporarily, fire at our enemies from the sky using all the
ammunition till the end!
switch yamato.s engine to full power.
go up the sky in full speed!
want to escape?
chase them!
don.t let them escape!
2,000 kilometers now!
shima, shut off the engine!
make an emergency turn!
yes!
engine shut off.
fire the ammunition!
back off!
what?
back off!
lnform all the ships!
not all the ships!
what?
1st to 3rd ships travel with ours, to undergo space shift!
all other ships wait here to cover us!
this is for the success of backing off, and then sacrifice them?
this is an order!
be quick!
assistant officer!
captain, our enemy.s escaping using space shift!
what?
shima, turn left!
turn left!
oh!
ah!
everyone is fighting bravely!
long live general desslok!
ah!
our enemy rammed into the left of the ship, near the canteen!
the route behind is damaged!
the missile shooting room.s on fire!
work unit, go to the damaged area in full armour!
cut off the enemy ship!
lnform all members!
prepare for a battle on the ship!
combat unit, go to where our enemy infiltrated in full armour!
yuki, inform lifestyle unit to take care of the casualties!
yes!
faster!
what?
hide!
enemies!
ryusuke!
yes!
bring the gun over while l cover you!
or everyone would be killed!
yes!
be fast!
ah!
mr heida, are you alright?
don.t show your head!
l.m ok.
distribute the guns!
yes!
ryusuke!
ryusuke, hold the gun tight, take a deep breath, then shoot!
yes!
damn!
lifestyle unit in the canteen is in danger!
prepare the transport truck!
use it as a shield to deal with them!
yes!
doctor, more casualties!
what is the combat unit doing?
yuki, go take a look!
yes!
yuki, enemies are walking around in the ship, be careful!
yes!
what?
ah!
ryusuke!
commander!
ls everyone ok?
we.re saved by captain in the nick of time.
senior is great!
ryusuke, behind you!
what?
ryusuke.
commander, l... l killed someone!
ryusuke, this is a war.
but never lose the feeling of crying and emotions!
senior!
move the enemy ship away!
be quick!
the safety strap on the left side has not been pulled over!
be faster!
to all warriors of yamato who have fought courageously and sacrificed, rest in peace in space!
we.ll never forget all of you!
fire!
salute the souls of the space warriors!
mr heida!
ln the mission to save earth and mankind, many youths were sacrificed.
nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing incredibly and the solar system.s facing extermination.
where should mankind go?
yamato took off on a mission to find a
2nd earth, but find itself involved in a galactic war instead!
faster!
yamato!
from now till the end of all life forms, there.re 325 more days to go.
325 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
the rough seas of alpha centauri
__file_terminal__
space cruiser yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
planet-destroying proton missile.
sun tour vessel.
beginning of 23rd century.
earth defense force headquarters.
although the reason for the tragedy of the sun tour vessel was reported as unknown, radars from earth defense force
detected stray bullets drifting from somewhere in space.
earth federation university.
after some time, professor simon of space physics department from earth federation university
observes that nuclear fusion in the sun is increasing in speed.
professor simon.
according to his calculations, all life on earth will be destroyed within a year.
however, professor kuroshida from solar capital observation department claims that it.s a usual occurrence, rejecting professor simon.s theory.
solar capital observation department professor kuroshida.
earth federation general.
the federation government also submits to professor kuroshida.s theory.
professor simon.s confident of his theory discussed it with earth.s federation, commanding officer.
the only way for human survival is to find a 2nd earth in 1 year
and migrating there.
commanding officer made an arbitrary decision to send yamato
japan, angen.
yamato.s in a secret dock, undergoing works
to prepare it for the mission.
on the other hand, dismissed members of yamato are recalled urgently.
even graduates of youth space warrior training school were gathered.
great battle in the milky way.
hello kato!
you.re late!
sorry, l.ve lots of trouble.
heard that you.ve promoted as captain of yamato.
congratulations.
that is?
cosmo hound is the robot for exploring planets.
lifestyle and pilot units are working together for a test trial.
the planet-exploring cosmo hound
is working pretty well.
who.s controlling it?
hamu yong, a new cadet from youth space warrior training school.
good, next.s the cabin control!
have been waiting for a long time!
that fellow.s a genius!
if you don.t improve, you.ll never be a captain!
you shall see.
hey, yong, here.s an empty seat.
yes.
we were just talking about you.
captain!
a telegraph from earth defense force headquarters.
oh?
what happened?
lt.s the order to remove yong from post.
what?
daddy, that.s too much!
doctor sado!
welcome!
doctor sado!
oh, lifestyle captain!
doctor sado reporting for duty.
this is nurse midaiko.
kindly give us your advice!
oh, analyzer!
doctor sado!
you are fine already?
how l wish to cure a robot patient before l die!
l won.t want you to cure me, even if my life depends on it!
haha!
you.re direct.
l didn.t expect so many robots.
yes, in order to find a 2nd earth, we need them for explorations.
it should be that side!
analyzer became the head of robots, therefore it.s very busy.
that fellow.s enthusiastic!
yamato navigation unit, design room.
we need to find a planet which has similar living conditions as earth.
thus it needs to be of the same temperature and atmosphere as earth.
the milky way is in a spiral manner, diameter of 100,000 light years.
there are individual names in the spiral and the solar system we live in is at the position of 30,000 light years away, in the nebula named as
ccccc.
even if we built many migrating ships, continual navigation powers has only 15,000 light years.
therefore the 2nd earth must be in this range.
although yamato has a wave motion engine and limitless navigation powers, the migrating ships can.t reach the 2nd earth, even if it.s in this range.
from earth, large numbers of planets gather in the center of the milky way.
from the sky, they.ll seem like small sesame seeds.
only when many planets overlap, do they seem like a galactic river.
thus, yamato must move towards the centre of the milky way,
in search for the 2nd earth.
among the numerous stars, that is, referring to suns with satellites, we only need to search for distances and sizes similar to that between earth and the suns.
we.ll take a look from barnard star that.s 6.4 light years away from earth, then penetrate below sagittarius.
don.t we pass by sagittarius?
sagittarius had been proven not to be the type similar to earth.
ok, ok.
we can observe up to a distance of 5,000 light years from earth.
from that distance, we.ll choose the best route from earth to the planet that is most similar to earth.
the red portion is the exploration range of yamoto,
beyond the range of 5,000 light years, it.s to be created by navigation.
l got it.
beyond 5,000 light years, nothing can be seen, it.ll just be an empty map.
ln the center of the milky way nebula, the galman empire fleet, the gigantic galactic nation, has already advanced here.
galman empire.
the galman empire used advanced technology and powerful armaments to tyrannize and attack galactic nations on the milky way, in order to
rule the entire milky way.
eastern direction commander gaidel.s in charge of earth.s eastern battle line.
under his command, there.s the 18th mechanised armoured division.
they start the attacks towards the eastern part.
before the attacking route of dagon.s fleet, there.s a planet berth.
planet berth.
planet berth fleet
commanding berth.s fleet, legendra, is captain ram.
although captain ram fights courageously, they.re not up to the standards of the balman empire, which is stronger in both technology and armaments.
we.ve not been defeated, rally our forces immediately!
ln the duo with planet berth.s fleet,
dagon.s fleet had a temporary victory.
with that momentum, they attacked earth, on the solar system.
planet alpha centauri.
earth developed its range in
space, from minor planets on the solar system to planet alpha centauri that.s 4.3 light years away.
alpha centauri, 4th planetary grounds.
start the attacks!
how are things going on?
orders were given to nearby warring satellites to attack as well.
oh!
earth defense force satellite.
can the planet-patrolling fleet take off now?
officer, please look!
the 11th planet, pluto, and the minor planet grounds have sent their fleets.
can the warring satellites sustain before they arrive?
officer!
the captain of yamato is here.
oh?
officer, l.m late!
how are the preparations for yamato to take off?
we just need 6 more days.
at the frontline of alpha centauri, unknown enemies are attacking.
so how is the situation?
very unfavorable.
lt.s just a matter of time that we.ll not be able to sustain any longer.
kodai, hope that you can take off as soon as possible.
l understand, 6 more days to go.
l.ll try to take off soon.
l.m counting all on you.
galman empire fleet found!
captain ram, our enemy has yet to detect us.
lt.s rather unstable to attack under such a situation now.
why don.t we return to planet berth to repair our vessel, then attack?
captain ram.
soldiers of berth won.t hide from our enemies!
yes...
yes!
prepare to attack!
berth fleet.s attacking from behind!
commander dagon.
lnteresting, l.ll get rid of him this time!
stop the attacks of alpha centauri.
turn backwards, attack those fleets!
stupid fellow!
earth federation university.
earth federation university, space physics laboratory.
professor simon.
chief?
professor kuroshida.s here too.
l.ll visit you if there.re problems.
head of observation department professor kuroshida.
chief of university.
no, how.s the observance of the sun by professor simon?
every time the statistics increase, nuclear fusion in the sun increases.
ls it so?
l.m sorry to interrupt during your important research.
professor simon, from tomorrow please resign from yourjob at the university.
ok, the trial of the wave motion engine begins!
l know!
oh?
captain!
lt.s weird, seems to be interference of electromagnetic waves.
what?
again?
lt.s electromagnetic wave interference.
tokyo
tokyo airport.
what happened?
lt.s electromagnetic wave interference.
again?
that.s bad!
close the airport until communications have regained to normal.
oh?
an aeroplane is flying in!
no!
emergency landing!
oh?
there are experimental machines on the runway.
yong hakyu.
mum!
central hospital.
yong .s mother.
no, move your hands!
mum, you must try your best!
oh?
mum!
mum, it.s me!
l.m here!
yong ...
mum, are you awake?
didn.t you go to yamato?
that.s because...
yong has left yamato.
dad!
mum, yong .s already an adult.
yes.
l only allowed you to study in youth space warrior training school.
then, you must work in my company.
yong, don.t let me worry.
no!
what did you say?
l want to be in yamato!
l.ve been thinking, l lead a different life from daddy!
my life is in yamato!
l won.t allow it!
perhaps everyone.s afraid of your words, but it.s different now, daddy!
what is the difference?
yong!
do you think the officer will give orders for you to board the vessel without my permission?
yong, you should know!
l.m holding an important position in the defense force!
hubby...
what are you doing?
mum!
you.ll die if you do this!
yong, it.s alright... lf you step into a life you... don.t desire, l don.t wish to live!
hubby!
you must let yong board yamato!
you must let him board yamato!
please, dear!
lt.ll be the right choice.
the electromagnetic wave interference the other time and today.s happenings.
the abnormal activities on the sun has created massive impacts!
professor simon!
mr kodai, l.m no longer a professor.
what?
what.s this all about?
mr kodai, you don.t have to bother.
please take a look.
just like what my statistics show, the nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing.
yamato will search for a 2nd earth?
professor simon, don.t worry.
yamato will take off soon.
great, hearing this, l can go back in peace.
nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing incredibly.
the solar system.s facing extermination and earth is involved in the galactic wars among nations in space.
where should human beings on earth go?
5 more days to the take off of yamato.
next episode:
star force embarks at dawn
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
planet phantom
space battleship yamato has finally found the 2nd earth.
that's planet phantom which desslok introduced.
but after landing, before the eyes' of yamato members, were illusions after illusions.
oh?
it's captain juhzoh!
captain!
it's the tomb of heroes!
what?
how can it be?
what?
yuki, did you see that?
yes, l saw.
very clearly.
it's really the tomb of heroes!
why is it like this?
the lost hope
what?
planet phantom's creating illusions?
it's impossible!
do you have any idea what's going on?
no, not at all.
perhaps, there are information that we don't know about planet phantom.
that's impossible.
we've stated everything in the report.
oh?
ricci!
yes!
send investigation vessels to planet phantom, and give me a detailed report!
alright.
major harmeyai.
undergo space shift immediately!
targeted destination is planet phantom!
confirm galactic mark!
galactic mark at g3y51b!
space shift preparation completed!
space shift!
mr sanada, how are things?
bad!
no matter trying how many times, the results are the same!
l can only derive that it's the same type of planet as earth!
if it's not technical problems, are there any ways to find out the reason behind the illusions?
hold on!
it's analyzer!
analyzer?
haven't you understood the importance of my words?
l'm not spoilt, yamato's computer is!
alright, use analyzer to check again.
yes, this is the medical room.
analyzer?
he's asleep.
wake him up immediately!
l need his help!
alright, l'll wake him up now.
hey!
wake up!
hey!
it's your turn to help now!
analyzer?
what happened?
you said you don't need help!
don't need help?
mr sanada doesn't believe in him, so he doesn't even want to take a look.
not even a look?
what's that fellow saying?
doctor, l'll request him personally.
hey analyzer!
wake up!
captain kodai is requesting for your help!
hey analyzer!
do you hear me?
what are you trying to do now?
too much!
analyzer!
oh, ms mori!
analyzer, please help.
well, actually l'm a man too...
ouch!
l really don't know what to do with him.
analyzer, do your best!
do your best!
after which, we can only wait for the investigation results.
take orders until then, conserve your energy!
yes!
it had been years since we lay on the grass like this.
yes.
even the feel of the grass and the wind's smell is the same as earth.
so what are the illusions all about?
oh?
haha!
hamu...
hamu!
yes?
you are?
oh?
that's planet phantom?
ya...
hey!
get up!
ryusuke!
what happened?
there!
there?
what happened?
that's weird!
there's a girl!
girl?
ls it an illusion again?
no, it's a girl!
report to captain!
alright.
general desslok, we're contacted by major harmeyai.
alright, transmit it to the screen.
yes!
general desslok!
what happened?
harmeyai!
planet phantom...
phantom is the same as our galman-gamilon!
what?
so, it's not the same as earth?
yes, please take a look.
this is?
check thoroughly!
yes.
l'm major harmeyai from
galman-gamilon empire.
general desslok ordered me to investigate on this planet.
thank you.
l'm space battleship yamato's captain kodai.
l'll be direct, captain kodai.
what is the natural environment of this planet in your view now?
what do you mean?
same as earth?
or same as galman-gamilon?
it seems like earth to me.
ls that so?
that's incredible.
to us, it seems like the view of
galman-gamilon empire.
galman-gamilon empire?
yes.
so, this planet will look different according the viewer's culture
and experiences?
seems like it.
how can it be?
so, what's this planet exactly?
it seems like hypnotism!
it's mr sanada and analyzer!
mr sanada!
it's been on you, what have you found out?
well, we've a conclusion finally.
this is major harmeyai, sent over by general desslok.
he's yamato's assistant captain sanada.
analyzer, make your report!
l'll report it now!
after combining all investigation results, we conclude that planet phantom is a living planet.
living planet?
l believe it's living body of the vast space.
living body of space?
what is that conclusion based on?
based on the fact that this planet emits ultimate energy powers.
ultimate energy powers?
yes, based on these ultimate energy power, not only human's eyesight and hearing, even all investigation devices will also detect illusions.
why is that so?
it's protecting itself from enemies and from harsh conditions of space.
l see, that's probably the reason.
but your investigation results are speculations only.
there are no evidence.
we'll use our ways to investigate.
what ways?
firing exploration drills into the grounds of the planet.
exploration drills?
that's ridiculous!
since you know it's the living body of space, you shouldn't do that!
but l'm a scientist too, l can't go back with someone else's investigation results.
start to fire exploration drills!
preparations to fire exploration drills completed!
starting to count down!
5, 4, 3, 2, 1!
fire!
tse...
tse tse...
tse tse!
what happened, analyzer?
ah!
what's this?
ah!
oh!
ah!
oh!
kodai!
return to base!
what's that?
ah!
escape!
emergency take off!
let me go!
it's painful!
ah!
don't!
oh no!
exploration vessel!
everyone!
run!
oh?
that is?
captain and the others!
everyone, escape in the cosmohound!
what?
quickly!
how are ryusuke and hamu?
now that you mention... l'll find them!
no, you'll be in danger too!
retreat first!
ryusuke, this way!
wait, we're running in the opposite direction of the base!
who says so!
this way!
oh?
this is?
it seems to be leading the way!
ls it really this way?
it can't be wrong!
hold on!
hey!
mr hamu!
ls it the living body of space?
yes!
ricci!
yes!
our empire and l will not allow tolerate this damn planet phantom!
yes, l'll order eastern fleet's...
commander gustav to set off!
commander gustav.
undergo space shift towards planet phantom!
planet phantom is indeed the living body of space.
desslok has ordered for the planet-destroying missile to set off.
what will be the destiny of the missing ryusuke and hamu?
from now till the end of mankind, there're 113 more days.
113 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
farewell planet phantom
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
desslok offered to help in order to control the sun's expansion.
but even galman-gamilon's technology failed.
as compensation, he told yamato that
in the region ruled by galman-gamilon, there's a planet phantom that's similar to earth.
on the way to planet phantom
navigation unit, surveying room.
according to information provided by desslok, the planet phantom we're traveling to is on the far lands of planet m16783,
9,950 light years away from our present position.
we'll need to undergo 3 space shifts to reach our destination.
but calculation for 1 of the navigation routes is still unclear.
space migration headquarters.
as the sun gradually expands,
earth's damage has reached its limits.
l know all those things!
l just want to hear strategies now.
yes!
how are we going to deal with the billions of earthers?
regarding countermoves, until now...
captain, it's time for the routine reports.
yes.
kodai, all the humans have moved to
the underground city that was used to battle desslok.
we also command from the underground defense force headquarters.
migration ship-building centre.
the underground ship-building centre is also building spacecrafts for migration very quickly now.
but, as for the exploration teams to
gigor meyar,
caseo deyar, lonses mae and brusqos,
they've yet to bring back any hopeful reports.
to all on yamato who's in charge of the centre of the galaxy, l hope that you'll bring back a positive report from planet phantom.
the routine report shall end here.
communications unit, what was the signal just now?
no, nothing.
that's cunning.
mr nambu, did you see something just now?
l saw some flower-like object.
shower, it's a flower that only blooms when earth defense force headquarters communicate with yamato.
yes, it's the flower of love.
hey, don't say that.
hahaha!
now, our ship's traveling towards planet phantom using space shift.
prepare for space shift!
all ships, prepare for space shift!
space shift!
bolar federation defense satellite.
bolar federation main planet.
what?
yamato has actions?
stategist officer gosafus.
flying towards star clusters m16783,
is only a space battleship, but if it's desslok's partner, it's an eyesore!
stategist officer gosafus.
yes!
ln the region under bolar federation rule, l won't even allow an insect to fly in!
get rid of it!
nation central battle room
vice commander sergens l'm vice commander sergens.
l've been under your care.
skip the greetings!
this is prime minister's order!
set off to destroy yamato!
yamato?
8th defense-attack fleet base fortress
destroyer vessel.
navigation unit, conduct a simple survey immediately!
yes!
captain, there's a sos signal!
what?
determine the source immediately!
yes!
position of the source is 4,000 kilometres away!
11 o'clock direction, from a small planet in a dense star cloud.
magnify it on the screen!
yes!
shower, which nation's signal is that?
l don't know!
it's not galman-gamilon!
it's not bolar federation as well!
captain, l think we need to check it out!
check?
if we don't determine the truth in the signal, we shouldn't go.
we don't know if they are our enemies, and if that's a sos signal!
there's indeed danger in it!
the more we need to check it out!
alright, ryusuke, hamu, analyzer!
gather at 1st vessel bridge!
this is very dangerous, please be very careful.
yes!
analyzer will determine the source of the signal.
yes!
l'll investigate thoroughly.
analyzer, say no more.
set off immediately!
the signal has broken off!
what?
need to ask them back?
no, it's ok, they're my juniors from
youth space warrior training school.
can you see anything?
no, the air is too dense, l can't see clearly!
damn, even the signal has broken off!
oh!
what happened?
there's metal reaction from the planet in front.
what?
alright, let's go and take a look.
metal reaction's getting stronger!
please move on!
l understand!
it's approaching!
hey, it's a spacecraft!
alright, let's land.
yes!
it's a very old spacecraft.
has it broken down?
go nearer!
alright!
there's response of life!
what?
who are those fellows?
attackers!
ah!
oh?
analyzer, contact yamato!
yes!
worshippers of mother starsha?
yes, we're looking for planet starsha that had great influence on the
milky way thousands of years ago, bringing love and peace to all planets.
they're sight-seeing.
sight-seeing?
listen to me, we've been involved in the galman-gamilon and bolar federation war.
the chaos in the milky way made everyone to live in agony.
we hope mother starsha to save us from the pain and agony, thus got onto this spacecraft, wandering in space for 25 years!
25 years?
yes, although we don't know how many years it would take, our children will carry on our mission when we collapse.
our grandchildren can carry it on when the children collapse.
until we find planet starsha, we're prepared to wander in space.
just like us.
we're wandering in space too, in search of a 2nd earth.
l understand your feelings.
we're just like you, sight-seeing...
thank you, our meeting must have be guided by starsha.
so, you were the ones who sent the sos signal?
as our spacecraft is damaged, we had to land on this planet.
but we can't be discovered by galman-gamilon and bolar federation so we can't send permanent sos signals.
we could only send temporary ones.
l understand your situation, we'll help with your reparations.
thank you very much.
looks like it's done.
oh.
l sincerely thank everyone from yamato.
thanks to you, we can finally set off.
hope that your future journeys would be safe and sound.
from parents to children, children to grandchildren.
although we've not much time, at least we can help those people with their reparations, then we'll have to search for the 2nd earth.
yes.
captain, 12 battleships are approaching at high speeds!
12 o'clock direction, 6,000 kilometers away!
vessels of unknown nationality!
take in the work unit!
everyone, stay in your positions!
how far away is the sight-seeing vessel?
1,000 kilometers away from yamato.
it's in the battle range, it'll be affected.
captain, that vessel requires our protection!
cosmo tigers, set off!
protect the sight-seeing vessels out of the battle range!
yes!
battleship fleet 5,000 kilometers away!
we've detected its identity!
it's the bolar federation fleet!
ls that so?
switch on the communication circuit!
yes!
lnform bolar federation commanding vessel!
this is earth's space battleship yamato!
we've no reason to battle with you!
please get out of battle formation!
l repeat!
please get out of battle formation!
l'm vice commander sergens from bolar federation's 8th fleet.
cut the crap!
enemy fleet getting into battle shape!
divided into two groups!
damn, we've no choice!
everyone, get into battle shape!
3,200 kilometers away!
yamoto's 2,600 kilometers away!
space missiles prepared to fire!
fire space missiles!
captain, those are induction missiles!
alright, use wave motion bomb to secure yamato's surroundings!
2nd attack approaching!
fire wave motion bombs!
enemy fleet approaching fast!
they've gotten into shooting range!
prepare to fire main canon!
target at bolar federation!
prepare to fire main canon!
target at bolar federation!
fire!
damn!
they've caught up with us!
all battleships, retreat!
ah!
start attacking!
lnform all battleships!
use missiles to focus on attacking enemy vessel's vessel bridge and deck!
mother starsha!
please give our yamato, that has battled because of us, enormous strength!
oh?
it's mother starsha!
oh?
what?
mother starsha actually appeared in front of us!
that's the direction of planet phantom.
really?
perhaps it told us the way to planet phantom.
alright, yamato, travel in full speed!
yamato, travel in full speed!
yamato has a conflict with bolar federation again.
what kind of planet is planet phantom, which yamato is traveling towards?
from now till the end of mankind, there're 139 more days.
139 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
the planet of lllusions
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
endlessly expanding sun
ln the search for a planet suitable for human survival, none of the exploration teams has brought any good news.
but, only yamato, positioned in the milky way, after contacted by desslok, travelled towards planet phantom,
a planet that could be a 2nd earth.
space shift completed!
oh?
it's earth!
really!
earth?
how can it be?
it's not earth, it's planet phantom!
planet phantom looks really alike!
planet phantom lt really looks like earth.
lllll, confirm the position.
yes!
it's a faraway land in star clusters m16783.
lts galactic mark is g3y51b8, there's no mistake.
just like desslok's information, it's planet phantom.
oh?
success!
we finally found a planet that's totally the same as earth!
desslok didn't lie!
really!
we're saved!
earth is saved!
hahaha!
planet of lllusions
success!
hahaha!
we don't want to lose too!
fire the main canon!
young people nowadays, don't even know how to present their happiness.
when they're happy, they should be drinking quietly.
this is the actual way of showing happiness.
use type a satellite to check the atmosphere.
type a started!
everything's alright!
use type c satellite to check the grounds.
type c started!
everything's alright!
use type e satellite to check for living organisms.
type e started!
everything's alright!
all the statistics are alright!
start the statistic data circuit!
starting computer no. 1, 2 and 3!
everything's alright!
type a satellite starting!
we've received statistics!
76.2º% nitrogen content!
0.92º% hydrogen content!
0.03º% carbon dioxide content!
oh?
analyzing unit, go back to the previous pictures!
it's the pictures in the fields.
magnify to the maximum!
island!
captain, those are wild cows!
same type as earth!
time to revolve around earth for a week is 23.5 hours.
gravitational force 0.9!
there're 2 poles!
ground temperature of 22 degrees!
humidity 40º% !
radioactive rays could exist!
human can survive!
oh!
showara, contact earth defense force headquarters!
yes!
my mission is completed, thanks to
galman-gamilon's general desslok!
earth's saved!
l really want to thank him!
showara, please report to desslok!
yes!
earth
space migration headquarters
these are the information we've gathered so far.
they're all satisfactory and worth paying attention to, that is, planet phantom is a suitable choice.
kodai, good job!
yamato's great!
success!
but, kodai, please have a final investigation, just in case.
yes, l know, officer.
galman-gamilon main planet
no news from kodai yet?
we're receiving one now!
desslok!
kodai, l've received the 1st report!
success finally!
we've yet to do a final investigation, but we know it's a planet suitable for human survival.
l sincerely thank you.
l just did it for an old partner!
you don't have to thank me!
this is for you, kodai!
thank you.
talan!
yes!
contact bolar federation again!
what?
l said bolar federation!
you have any problems?
no, no problems!
l'll do it right away!
bolar federation.
gosafus!
yes!
where's yamato now?
stategist officer gosafus that
yamato has destroyed space destroyer.
l know about that, what happened next?
it's on the faraway lands of planet m16783, in the skies of planet phantom,
galactic mark g3y51b8.
planet phantom?
skies of planet phantom!
yes.
give way!
alright!
why are you in a daze?
captain!
mr kodai!
analyzer, what's up?
are you giving orders to land on planet phantom?
ls it?
yes?
of course.
l disagree!
totally disagree!
it'd be very dangerous to land!
what did you say?
1st exploration unit, geology unit fully prepared!
3rd exploration unit, biology unit, botany unit fully prepared!
it's dangerous!
analyzer, speak up fast!
what danger is there?
although l can't say it specifically, planet phantom is very dangerous,
l know it!
it seems to be surrounded by petal-like objects, it just looks dangerous!
we've yet to find out what that is!
anyway, it's just dangerous!
it's too dangerous to land like that!
l hope you understand, it's very dangerous!
can't you say it clearer?
analyzer, you're giving me a headache!
analyzer, did you spoil it because you were too excited?
what?
no wonder!
we also feel that it's weird and a waste of energy!
you scoundrel!
don't be so rude!
oh, that's scary!
hahaha!
that's too much!
you'll wait and see!
oh?
captain, what kind of danger is analyzer talking about?
since it's an unknown planet, there'll bound to be unpredictable occurrences.
but we'll never know what the danger is if we don't land.
yes, that's right.
l'm sorry.
desslok called?
yes!
he wishes to talk to you about yamato.
alright, answer it.
yes!
sir bemlaze, it's been a long time since we last met.
general desslok, l never imagined you'd contact me in this form.
l'll be straightforward.
not to attack yamato?
our fleet suffered because of yamato!
how can we agree to that?
even if it's your request!
you actually said such cowardly words!
what?
although yamato and galman-gamilon's combined strategy was great, you actually chased them out, l really got to thank you!
l understand.
whether l chased them out or not, you'll know in the battles.
hahaha!
cosmohound's check is completed!
alright, all members on board!
open the secret exit!
oh?
what happened to the door?
what happened?
analyzer is causing trouble in the power control room!
what?
hold on!
l'll take a look!
damn!
don't joke!
those scoundrels!
stop it!
no matter what, l won't allow you to land!
analyzer!
l won't let you land!
analyzer, stop!
ah, miss mori, l...
l...
go up!
what are you doing?
let me go!
why must you do this?
you have yet to realize the importance of what l said?
mr sanada, the investigation result is weird!
l can't let anybody to go to that unknown planet!
oh, is it spoilt?
l'm not spoilt, lt's yamato's computer!
well, but all the computers on yamato had the same results.
so, you mean...
what do you mean by that look?
fine, dismantle it to have a check!
no, stop!
stop!
come on!
ouch, it's painful!
what are you all quarreling about?
doctor, save me!
l'll be killed!
killed?
that's an unusual one!
we are unusual!
yes!
all because of him, the investigation is delayed!
it's all his fault!
calm down!
let me handle it.
because analyzer's my friend!
let me handle it!
this planet is weird!
why doesn't everyone listen to me?
l believe you!
doctor, isn't it too late?
let your mind be more sober!
what's this?
you're trying to get me drunk?
don't say that, l'm just asking you to have a cup!
doctor!
how can ask me to drink at this critical moment?
yes, analyzer.
l'll not drink!
kodai and sanada know very well!
they knew there'll be danger!
they've to see in order to know, right?
l say they can't go, don't you get me?
there's no detection of danger in the range of 100 metres!
there's no poisonous bacterium in the investigation, nothing like bacteria!
yes, results of the analysis had no response as well!
alright!
so, let's begin the exploration!
work unit, take charge of photographs!
lifestyle unit, check the plants and animals!
combat unit, start investigating!
end of conversation!
there's the sound of birds somewhere!
hey!
look at those!
ryusuke, if there are cute girls strolling here, it'd be great!
yes, you're so right!
it's a total spoiler to be with men!
well, we think likewise!
hahaha!
oh?
ryusuke's late parents and
hamu's parents are here!
how can it be?
what a beautiful river!
there's yuki mori's parents.
kodai, that is?
kodai is looking at something too.
died in the battle is standing there.
captain juhzoh.
energy level is normal!
good!
lnduction device 1, 2 and 3 are fine!
good!
analysis computer's communication device is working normally!
good!
oh?
kodai!
ln front of sanada is kodai's late brother
mamoru kodai and his wife, starsha.
oh!
those are illusions!
lllusions!
did you see that?
l saw my late parents who had died on earth!
l saw the house l lived in!
kodai, l saw your brother and starsha.
mr sanada, what is that?
l don't know, but what l saw is the truth.
oh?
that is?
what?
after reaching planet phantom, that's similar to earth, with great pains, what awaits them upon landing, was all sorts of different illusions.
what is the real identity of planet phantom?
ls it an illusion that the 2nd earth has been founded?
from now till the end of mankind, there're 118 more days.
118 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
lost hope
__file_terminal__
space cruiser yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
at the beginning of the 23rd century, ln the centre of the milky way nebula,
galman empire.s attempting to rule the entire space.
ln the east, general dagon.s at the
frontline, attempting to conquer berth, but planet berth fleet.s captain ram fought courageously.
a missile from this galactic war drifted into the sun,
resulting in the increase of nuclear fusion in the sun.
all life forms will be exterminated in 1 year.s time.
if mankind do not migrate to a 2nd
earth in a year, there.ll be no chance of survival.
yamato began its journey in search for a 2nd earth.
sos!
legendra!
yamato.s traveling towards neptune and planet brumas.
neptune
planet berth fleet, lengendra.
there.s an unknown battleship approaching from top-right corner.
20,000 kilometers away!
prepare to attack!
where.s the battleship?
check its nationality!
there.s no record of such a battleship.
yoshikazu, order it to stop battle.
yes!
a message is transmitted over, transmission to the screen now.
berth fleet, captain ram.
l.m planet berth fleet legendra.s captain ram.
l.m yamato.s captain kodai.
legendra has intruded into earth.s territory, please leave immediately.
as you.ve seen, our battleship is
that.s not possible.
if we give aid to battleships that has no connection with earth, our neutral stand would be in danger.
fine, if we have to leave, but our flagship is damaged and we also lack fuel and food.
captain, what can we do?
let defense force officer decide then.
calm down!
looks like they.re not our enemy.
captain, officer has a message, it.s transmitted to our screen now.
l.ve received your message!
what is officer.s opinion?
reject legendra.s request!
but, officer!
we could have done that, but it.s not right to do it.
but they.re only staying for 24 hours and l only allow reparation of their flagship and provide fuel and food!
yes!
don.t provide armaments and ammunition!
l understand that!
remove battle mode!
welcome captain ram at the cabin!
salute to captain ram.
l.m yamato lifestyle unit.s commander, yuki mori.
please provide me with information of air and gravity that you need.
air and gravity adjustment room.
this information is the same as earth.s!
though there.re many planets in the milky way, if their living conditions are different from earth, then life forms can.t survive.
that.s right!
yamato captain.s room.
l.m yamato.s captain kodai.
l.m legendra.s captain ram.
legendra will undergo a 24-hour reparation and refueling works at neptune.s base.
please stay and take a rest here.
thank you, this is yamato right?
lt.s an incredible battleship.
captain ram, l wish to speak to you.
please take a seat.
can l know who your enemies are?
lt.s the galman empire fleet.
galman empire?
where are they?
what kind of nation is that?
captain kodai, it.s better for you not to interfere in our war.
lt.s alright, please tell me.
we wish to know what.s going on in the center of the milky way.
ls that so?
but we don.t know the details.
galman empire is expanding it.s territories and power, invading from
every direction, and our planet.s under invasion too.
please come in!
l.m ryusuke from lifestyle unit!
l.ve brought beverage in!
please select your desire drink.
l shall take my leave.
please enjoy.
so, captain, l shall make myself at home.
commander,
captain ram chose the type b wine, we can decide how to entertain him.
please prepare type b dinner.
sure!
yes?
captain ram, l need to take my leave.
what.s going on?
captain, look at those!
what kind of fleet is that?
it must be planet berth.s enemy!
so, that.s galman empire fleet?
galman empire fleet.
captain, that battleship is the same as the one we had an accident with!
earth.
they.re earth.s enemy!
galman empire fleet flagship.
galman empire fleet, commander dagon.
l.m east commander dagon of galman empire.
please hand over legendra!
l.ll give you a grace period of 10 minutes, please make a decision.
if you reject our request, we.ll attack earth.
captain ram?
captain kodai, please let me speak to him.
yoshikazu, connect with their battleship.
yes!
commander dagon, l.m ram.
so, you.ve escaped there?
commander dagon, earth is providing us with fuel and food only.
if we don.t do that, we can.t leave.
we won.t escape or hide.
don.t make promises like this.
we.ve 8 more hours here.
then l.ll leave to battle with you.
you can wait till then!
alright then!
8 hours!
captain, according to our report,
legendra has only a few usable canons, if they live, they can.t be saved.
mr sanada, don.t mention that please!
but...
my members are very important, l won.t let them die like this.
to us, the most important factor is the pride of a warrior.
earth defense force headquarters.
ls it?
kodai, make your own decision.
tell captain ram that l wish him luck!
l understand!
farewell, captain kodai!
captain ram!
if we defeat legendra, it.ll equate to conquering planet berth, l.ll also attack yamato as well.
everyone, prepare for battle!
legendra.s escaping using space shift!
we must attack before they do that.
attack yamato as well!
legendra.s taking off!
captain, captain ram.s calling through.
alright, transmit it to the screen.
captain kodai, thanks to you, our reparation and replenishments are completed, now we can leave!
l sincerely thank yamato and everyone on earth!
captain ram, yamato will see you off.
thank you for your kind help,
lnforming all members!
everyone, prepare for battle!
cosmo tiger, take off!
protect legendra!
prepare to attack!
1st and 2nd fleet, attack legendra!
we.ll deal with yamato!
yamato set off!
set off!
get the fleet into shooting range!
planet burma.s 3,000 kilometers ahead.
beyond that, it.s not earth.s territory.
yes.
prepare to undergo space shift!
prepare space shift!
captain, legendra seems to be undergoing space shift!
counting down for attack.
5 seconds!
fire!
yoshikazu, send out warning transmissions!
yes!
yamato has transmissions!
l have to warn you!
this is earth.s territory!
stop the attacks!
or yamato will have to interfere!
prepare to 2nd attack!
target at yamato!
fire!
attack, we can.t wait until leaving planet brumas!
cosmo tiger, attack!
fire the main canon!
yamato starting to attack!
that.s interesting.
yamato seems to be manipulated by destiny, involving in the galactic war.
the war among the 3 nations begins.
nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing incredibly and the solar system.s facing extermination.
where should mankind go?
from now till the end of all life forms, there.re 326 more days to go.
326 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
great battle near planet brumas
__file_terminal__
space cruiser yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
at the beginning of the 23rd century, a stray missile drifted from somewhere
in the universe, landing in the sun, resulting in the increase of nuclear fusion in the sun.
all life will be exterminated 1 year later.
other than migrating to space, there.re no other ways of surviving.
yamato must find a 2nd earth within 1 year.
but, in the centre of the milky way nebula, the huge galactic nation,
galman empire is reaching out for its ultimate goal to rule the entire space.
galman empire fleet.
galman empire fleet, commander dagon.
on dagon.s journey, there.s a planet berth.
planet berth.
planet berth fleet.
ls it dagon?
yes, commander gaidel!
how.s the situation over there?
lt.s just a matter of time to conquer berth.
commander gaidel, good, if you can defeat them, you.ll be awarded with the medal of honour.
thank you, commander gaidel.
fire towards mars!
galman empire.
long live general desslok!
general desslok!
long live general desslok!
so we.ll start our meeting now.
east commander, commander gaidel!
yesterday, our 11th mechanised armoured division battled in 2 routes, winning an overwhelming victory.
on general.s birthday, there.ll be 3 conquered planets as your gift.
commander gaidel!
yes!
your skills and glib tongue have improved quite a bit.
cheers to you.
commander histenbargar!
our battle line can support 62 of the battle, but we lost 1/3 of our army.
commander histenbargar!
yes!
you must be executed!
general!
if you fail 2 more times, you.ll be executed!
thank you, general!
next one!
beside the moon.
lnform everyone!
yamato.s undergoing a minor shift of space towards mars.
counting down 5 minutes!
shift in space is tougher for new cadets, right?
yes, so we must do a test trial now.
l see.
start the installation!
main engine has no problem!
lncrease in power!
power recharge check!
although everyone had experiences from
youth space warrior training school, but the space shift in yamato isn.t so easy!
take note!
be more accurate!
done!
cookery unit, heida.
senior, what are you doing?
if l don.t prepare faster, we.ll not be able to sustain longer.
ryusuke, don.t interfere, strap yourself well.
you.ve tried the procedures of space shift in the school right?
this is not the right way of sitting, lower the seat more.
strap your safety belt well.
yes, yes!
10 seconds to space shift!
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1!
space shift!
mars.
the minor space shift to mars is completed!
check all gears!
no problems!
captain, the gears are alright!
prepare for battle!
our goal is earth defense force mars base.
canon simulated board.
prepare the canons!
1st vessel bridge, canon control board.
fire!
order carried out!
22 seconds to firing!
lt.s still too slow!
continue the canon-firing training!
mr sanada, try out the gas bomb at the end of the yamato.
yes!
3rd and 7th area closed!
a fire is lighted!
fire-fighting unit setting off!
ando, what are you doing?
l.m still feeling giddy after the space shift.
l can.t see a thing, it.s all dark!
you... l can see now!
go quickly!
yes!
medical unit, take care of the casualties at the end of the vessel.
close all areas!
ouch, it.s painful!
sorry!
don.t be rough!
ouch!
stop the canon attacks!
oh!
fire the fake vessel!
weather radar.
yamato, enemy detected, 25 degrees to the right.
they.re 45,000 kilometers away!
cosmo tiger, prepare to take off!
yong, where have you been to?
we lost our way, we must find our way!
yamato is too big!
stupid!
get in quickly!
or we.ll leave you here.
ok, ok!
cosmo tiger, take off!
what are you doing?
get into battle formation immediately!
the 8th machine is too slow!
quick, go!
yes!
enemy detected!
start attacking!
cosmo tiger!
the 1st and 2nd attacks had a lapse of 1 second!
alright, next!
thank you!
lt.s serious!
aright, next one!
stupid!
only dead people go into the cold storage room!
oh, yes!
heida, are you done?
yes, almost!
quickly, pass over the completed ones!
yes!
just passed mars!
25 kilometers from minor planets path.
already traveled so far?
fire extinguished!
casualties are all taken care of!
reparation works are completed!
good!
captain, reparations are completed!
good, our next trial goal is the minor planets path!
yes!
food is here!
enemy base detected at minor planets path!
cosmo tiger, return!
yes!
earth defense force, minor planets path base.
yamato.s preparing to fire the canons!
our goal is the minor planet!
15 degrees to the left of yamato.
10 kilometers away!
fire!
food is here!
great!
everyone, have your meals!
l.m hungry!
commander, please let me fire the canon!
what?
do you know how to?
yes, please let me try!
you.ll try when l.m having my meal.
thank you!
success!
stupid!
lt.s not accurate.
you.re still far from firing canons.
go all the way attack the enemy.s base!
prepare to fire the canons!
target at the minor planet number 3218!
canon attack preparations completed!
fire!
mars.
the 16-hour training is over.
everyone is totally exhausted!
16 hours non-stop!
captain.s really unsympathetic!
how tired!
ls it a comic?
no, it.s the nutrition analysis of life in space.
oh?
ryusuke!
yes!
l.ve something to show you, come with me!
ya...
shooting training room.
after all the tedious training, l still need shooting training?
ryusuke!
yes?
that is not scary enough.
there.s a worse fellow!
captain?
l.m from the same batch as kodai.
although we work at different places, we both wanted to become a professor.
that fellow gave such instructions for the battle and to train himself.
he wants to train every inch of the body till its maximum.
his thumb is just like yamato.s canon control board.
if our enemy.s not defeated, yamato will be destroyed.
if yamato.s destroyed, all mankind on earth will be destroyed too.
kodai often requests perfection.
ln order to prevent mistakes, you must combine your weak self with a warrior.s body.
he.s just a human, thus he.ll also be scared and worried.
the only thing he could do is to train himself.
what l can do is to prepare a cup of lemon tea for him late at night...
ryusuke, are you asleep?
you must be tired!
yes, although l.m tired, l feel excited and comfortable.
ls it?
everyone was like this in the beginning.
tastes good...
want 1 more cup?
yes, please.
oh?
ok, just go!
senior, late night special training?
no.
oh?
faster, faster!
go quickly!
lt.s a missile!
there.re 3 of them!
shima, just go straight!
alright.
canon unit, prepare to attack!
this is not training, you.ll be attacked if you.re too slow!
canon attack preparations completed!
that.s the same type of missile as the one that destroyed sun tour vessel.
ls this the actual attack towards earth?
no, you can.t say that.
this should be missiles flying over from somewhere in space.
fire the canons!
the 2nd missile.s approaching!
shima, move 30 degrees to your right!
yes!
fire!
mr heida, it.s scary!
if we didn.t have that training...
so now you understand why yamato.s so strong?
yes.
now that fellow.s job is done.
he should take a good rest.
let.s rest too.
yes.
the massive strength of yamato kept flashing back in ryusuke.s mind.
that.s the strength normal people create after knowing their own weaknesses, through hard work and giving aid to each other.
nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing incredibly
and the solar system.s facing extermination.
where should mankind go?
from now till the end of all life forms, there.re 328 more days to go.
328 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
s o s legendra!
__file_terminal__
space cruiser yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
the milky way has a... diameter of 100,000 light years,
thickness of 15,000 light years and a billion stars.
therein lies newly born planets and also dying planets.
although life in the cosmos...
is endless,
earth, is no exception.
near the solar system...
planet berth fleet
enemy.s fleet detected!
galman empire fleet
the enemy.s fleet is within 100,000 kilometers!
commander dagon.
fire!
fight!
fire the canons!
the planet-destroying missile is moving towards the front!
planet-destroying proton missile.
attack the planet behind as well!
fire the missiles!
our enemy fleet is defeated!
our 1st proton missile drifted off its course!
ignore it!
the solar system is destroyed.
at the beginning of the 23rd century,
earth is 4.3 light years away from the sun.
having huge development opportunities, it.s stable and flourishing.
tokyo international cosmos airport.
announcing departing flights.
comet vessel taking off from tokyo at 1400.
passengers touring the sun...
daddy!
mummy!
ryu...
ryusuke?
l.m glad you can catch up with us!
youth space warrior, ryusuke domon.
ryusuke, it.s great that you.re here.
ls there any problem at the space warrior training school?
my teacher gave me time off to come here.
mummy.
you finally decided to see us off.
take care, ryusuke.
mum, don.t be like this.
you.re only going for a 10-day tour in space.
sun tour vessel.
be back soon!
daddy!
mummy!
just go!
mercury
everyone, this is the sun.
oh!
uh?
mum, what.s wrong?
what.s that?
hm?
it was thought to be a meteor, but it.s getting nearer and nearer.
ahh!
space warrior training school.
on the rooftop.
ln the formation of non-gravity.
shoot as you attack!
wow, that.s brilliant!
youth space warrior, yang.
good job!
removal of non-gravity.
those whose names are read out, get changed and gather at the church.
the principal.s going to speak to all of you!
all of you have been through tough training in this traditional
space warrior training school.
you are picked out of the cohort of next year.s graduating students to graduate in advance!
what?
graduate?
ryusuke domon.s getting in!
announcing emergency orders from headquarters of earth.
orders for ryusuke domon to be a member of the yamato.
yes!
work hard!
yes!
which department do you wish to go?
l wish to be like senior kodai.
able to work at the
canon department of combat unit.
hope that this would be approved.
alright, ryusuke domon.s to be sent to lifestyle unit for kitchen duties.
what?
can.t you listen?
you.re sent to lifestyle unit for kitchen duties!
why?
l.m not obligated to answer you!
you.re from combat unit?
yes, combat unit.
what was your initial dream?
of course the pilot department of the combat unit!
yes.
how can this be?
damn, that scoundrel!
earth defense force headquarters.
this is your letter of transfer!
what?
now, kodai is ordered to be captain of yamato.
me?
you.ve done a great job as a deputy captain on all your navigation trips.
l think you.re most suited to handle everything on yamato.
let me introduce your assistants.
they.ll be the assistant captains.
shima!
sanada!
congratulations, captain!
shima, we.re all in authority!
hope that the 3 of you will unite and do your best!
yes!
officer, what happened?
ln the commanding office,
head of space physics department, professor simon from
earth federation university waits.
professor simon.
professor simon.s speech follows:
ln earth federation university.s space physics laboratory, when professor simon was observing the sun, he found that the nuclear fusion in the sun increased incredibly.
according to calculations, if this occurrence continues,
life on earth has only 1 year left.
3 years later, the sun will undergo supernova and explode.
then, it.ll result the disappearance of earth and all other planets of the solar system from space.
earth federation general
professor simon is shocked at the seriousness of this matter, therefore presents the statistics to earth federation.s general on his personal basis.
oh...
solar capital.
general told solar capital the matter but professor kuroshida of the observation department...
hahaha!
no problem, general.
head of observation department, professor kuroshida.
we.ve observed closely, that.s a frequent occurrence.
ls it?
that.s great!
now that earth is prospering, l don.t wish to create unnecessary disturbances.
but, professor simon.s confident of his stand and he collected more statistics to
discuss ways of dealing it with earth defense force commanding officer.
professor simon concludes that human can only survive if a 2nd earth can be found, which everyone migrates to.
l.ve made a decision after knowing this.
if earth federation government.s decision is made too late, by the time they understand, it might be too late to find the 2nd earth.
thus my personal view is to send yamato to search for a suitable planet to migrate to.
we.re counting on you, kodai!
l understand, officer.
congratulations on your promotion!
should l thank you?
why?
l don.t know if l can do it.
kodai, you should be able to do it.
if we want to find a planet with similar living conditions,
yuki mori from lifestyle unit must work hard too.
l.ll be able to do it with your help, kodai.
11th star on the solar system.
emergency!
this is the 11th star.s radar control room.
an unknown and huge missile is flying towards earth!
officer!
it should be a stray bullet from somewhere in space.
destroy the missile in the path of the minor planets.
base of earth defense force for minor planets.
oh!
wow!
great impact!
kodai, according to the defense army, similar missiles had drifted here
3 weeks ago.
solar capital and general zhi felt that the tragedy of the vessel touring the sun was only an accident.
but the defence army speculated that it was hit by the missile.
then the missile shot towards earth?
there should be a war going on somewhere on space.
kodai, yuki, do you understand the reason to send
yamato to search for a 2nd earth?
this will be a tough journey!
yes!
japan, angen.
yamato is in the secret dock in mt angen, carrying out the preparations and transformations for the new journey.
ls it the yamato?
ryusuke domon reports for duty!
oh, you belong to the cooking department.
analyzer!
yes!
bring him to the captain of lifestyle unit!
come with me!
lt.s here.
captain, he.s new!
the captain.s a female?
ls it bad to be a woman?
don.t joke!
what?
l.ve to work under a woman?
you scoundrel!
how dare you be so rude!
analyzer!
what.s so bad about a woman!
sexual discrimination!
apologise!
l say, apologise!
get out!
that.s sly!
using legs!
damn, want to fight?
useless robot!
l.ll destroy you!
try me!
stop!
let me deal with this fight!
kodai!
this fellow.s angry with me!
l.ll fight with you if you want to.
but l won.t keep silent!
come on!
great!
you.re great!
senior, you too!
oh...
analyzer?
captain, you are here?
now there.s a huge electromagnetic wave interruption!
oh?
perhaps it.s because of the sun?
lt.ll be subdued soon.
analyzer needs to check it.
bring him to the work room.
yes.
professor simon seems to be right.
lt.s a pity.
l.ve to apologise.
l had been sent to search for bodies after the accident of the tour ship.
but l couldn.t find your parents.
bodies.
senior, you.ve searched for my parents. bodies?
l don.t know about that, l.m sorry.
your parents will rest in peace in the sun forever.
l.m also an orphan.
ls it?
just look.
ryusuke!
although it looks very pretty now, the sun is undergoing something scary.
we have to face it together.
ls the canon department your ambition?
yes.
you must work hard to be promoted.
l.ll wait for you!
yes.
with kodai.s hand on his shoulder,
ryusuke gradually got into the mood of being a real member of yamato.
ryusuke finally felt the sensation... ln the sun, nuclear fusion is indeed increasing incredibly.
the solar system will be destroyed soon, where should humans go to?
lt.s 2 weeks from the journey of space cruiser yamato.
next episode:
great battle on the milky way
__file_terminal__
space cruiser yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
at the beginning of the 23rd century, in the center of the milky way nebula,
galactic nation galman empire began its attacks in order to rule the milky
way, and started fierce battles.
goes astray into the sun.
nuclear fusion in the sun began to increase and all living things will die in 1 year.s time.
the only road to human survival is to find a 2nd earth and migrate there.
japan, angen.
thus, yamato accepted the mission to search for a 2nd earth and is ready to take off soon.
yamato took off as promised.
south cross island hotel.
this is south cross island, the resting place of pan pacific.
receiving emergency mobilization order by yoshikazu showara of yamato.s communication unit, on the mission by earth defense force to south cross island.
south cross island airport.
hey?
oh...
may l know... what has happened?
as it.s really pitiful, l.m finding a place to bury it.
but there.s no soil anywhere.
everywhere is paved with roads.
oh yes, there should be soil near the runway, go.
ok.
passengers taking flight jal412 at
1000, please start boarding now.
there.re wild chrysanthemums here?
this is my token of appreciation.
thank you.
thank you, bye!
oops, l didn.t ask for her name and address...
computer room.
this job is the slowest of all!
do your best!
there.s no time already and we still have to revamp them.
if inspections are needed, just use us robots!
you all never trust me!
analyzer, l didn.t add this because l don.t trust you.
don.t you understand?
do you understand?
no, l don.t!
ls it?
what a headache!
l.m so silly.
how could l forget to ask for her name?
are there better ways...
this is really uninteresting.
analyzer, you are too much.
l.m listening to your woes seriously!
don.t joke!
ls it?
even robots have woes!
it feels better!
on the journey of yamato, near the solar system, the fierce battle between galman
and planet berth continues.
galman empire fleet, commander dagon.
fire!
berth fleet, captain ram.
attacking vessel entering a shift in space!
enemy undergoing shift in minor space!
lnform everyone, use the shift in minor space to follow them!
skies of solar system.
enemy!
as there.s a miscalculation in the shift of space, we entered a planet in the solar system!
lt.s alright!
we, the galman empire will also attack this planet in future!
carry out investigations!
continue landing!
earth defense force headquarters.
an unknown battleship-like object is appearing in the sky!
officer, it.s flying towards angen!
contact kodai!
captain!
lt.s the emergency call from earth defense force.
yoshikazu, show it on the screen!
yes!
kodai, yamato should be able to capture it.
an unknown battleship landing.
yes, we don.t know what to do with it as we don.t know its aim.
enemy landed near japan, angen!
to yamato, it.s mankind.s important moment now.
l wanted to avoid unnecessary battles, it.ll be dangerous if yamato.s whereabouts are disclosed!
meet our enemy head-on!
yes!
japan, angen, 11 degrees northeast.
an enemy vessel approaching 23,000 kilometers in the sky above.
take off immediately, team of kato!
fight our enemy battleship!
take off!
approaching land attackers!
destroy them all at one go!
yes!
enemy vessel.s 3,500 kilometers in front.
1st and 2nd team, attack from the sky.
team 3, follow me!
everyone, get into battle state!
start attacking!
attacks completed!
leave the enemy vessel!
salute to captain!
everyone listen up!
space cruiser yamato will travel to space tomorrow morning at 0508.
l believe some of you know that our mission is to search for a 2nd earth!
as we get nearer to the solar system, large scale galactic wars are occurring,
thus, we can.t promise a safe return!
l give all of you a last chance, those that want to remain on earth, you can leave yamato!
yoshikazu, what happened?
yoshikazu, are you...?
don.t we always fight hand in hand?
l.m sorry, mr kodai and everyone...
i...
so it.s really because of that?
because yoshikazu has to wait for 1 more year... he went to look for herjust in case.
wait for 1 more year...
just in case...
kodai, what.s wrong?
yuki, can yamato really find a 2nd earth?
although shima said that it.s inevitable to find 1 or 2 in the numerous planets, l.m still worried.
what if we can.t find one?
lt.ll be the end of mankind.
if we get involved in the fierce galactic wars before finding the 2nd
earth... l can.t say l.ve... tried, but l can.t find it.
lt.s just not a valid excuse.
yuki, l should be the one wanting to leave!
kodai!
lt.s october now, yet it.s exceptionally warm here.
she.s my granddaughter.
she wants to take a look at yamato, l can.t say no.
everyone on yamato, l.m earth defense force officer, shiro kato!
l.m here to see you off to space!
earth federation government has yet to investigate changes on the sun, up till now, it.s my own decision to
send yamato to search for a 2nd earth!
as we were only ones patrolling at the vicinity of the solar system, there.s no one to see you off!
but, everybody!
l.m anticipating yamato.s good news!
please bring back the future of mankind.
cheers to the success and safety of everyone,
cheers!
this is the 1st vessel bridge.
this is my seat.
that seat is for analyzer when he needs it.
this seat is for canon unit.s nambu.
beside that is communications officer, yoshikazu.
officer, yoshikazu has left the vessel.
what did you say?
l hope that you can understand.
yoshikazu met a girl at south cross island airport while working at defense force.
ln south cross island airport?
that.s the girl yoshikazu is finding.
kodai ordered kato, yong and pilot members to bring yoshikazu back immediately.
you must find him!
ok!
yoshikazu!
oh?
haven.t you left?
l left, but l came back.
l should be searching for a 2nd earth, l can.t forget this.
l can look for the girl after that...
hey, yoshikazu!
come with me!
l.ll show you someone.
show me?
oh?
lt.s yoshikazu!
brace up!
hahaha!
what happened to you?
quick, ask for her name!
l.m shoko kato.
l...
l.m yoshikazu showara!
hahaha!
let go of your hands!
hahaha!
kodai, l depend on you!
ms kato, yes?
take care, goodbye.
yoshikazu, my confidence is surfacing.
yuki, let.s go.
yes.
lnform everyone!
prepare for the take off of yamato!
preparations completed!
starting wave motion engine!
opening the blockade point linking the wave motion engine axle.
opening the blockade point linking the axle!
pressure of engine increasing!
good, counting down 5 seconds to ignition!
4, 3, 2, 1, 0!
flywheel gradually igniting!
yamato takes off!
salute to earth!
yoshikazu showara won.t say l like you, but he thought he.ll be back... to say l like you and to meet her again.
nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing incredibly
and the solar system.s facing extermination.
where should mankind go?
from now till the end of mankind, there.re 329 more days.
329 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
shoot for planet mars
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
it's really hot!
l've never seen such whirlpools!
we're being drawn into it!
damn!
showara, transmit it to the screen!
yes!
that is it!
orion had immense gravitational forces... that pulled each other and thus causes movement.
but the pull was too immense, resulting in the loss in equilibrium and becoming space whirlpools.
after overlapping and burning, they become tornadoes.
so, there's oxygen in orion?
yes!
but humans can't live in a planet that's in such a state!
it's 10 minutes away from the space tornadoes!
shima, can't we turn back to avoid that?
no, we don't have enough power as the gear department has broken down.
if this goes on, we'll be drawn into the tornadoes!
yamato is drawn into the space whirlpools of cygnus, after being attacked by dagon's fleet, which tried to conquer earth.
now, it's threatened by the massive turbulence.
[ skipped item nr. 306 ]
yamato gear room.
what's the problem?
damn, the problem is unknown!
l think the connection to the wave motion engine system has problems.
gear commander, the power supplies have then become mixed up?
then we won't know which electrical circuit to repair!
contact mr sanada!
hold on!
l understand!
this thing!
gear commander, please let me contact!
what?
ask analyzer to come here?
what's the meaning?
just call it here immediately!
but, why?
3 more minutes away from the tornadoes!
time's running out!
mr sanada, there's no more time!
let me settle this!
mr sanada!
analyzer, come here!
how can l help?
please bear for a while!
ouch, what are you doing?
l'm borrowing your body for a while, l'll return it to you shortly!
circuit check confirmed, please change circuit 53!
change circuit parts 53!
be fast!
time's running out!
30 seconds away from the tornadoes!
it's hopeless!
gear commander, are the reparations completed?
success!
reparations completed!
10 seconds more and we can start off in full power!
good!
wave motion engine start off in full power!
move off in maximum speed!
ah!
start off!
just a bit more, and we can escape!
we've dashed over!
that was dangerous!
if we went to the centre of it, what would us have become?
that's a scary thought!
ya... l don't wish to experience that again!
galman empire, dagon fleet -- torpedo machines, bombers.
that is?
the enemy's vessels!
where did they appear from?
probably using space shift to escape the space whirlpool areas.
prepare to fire the main canon!
yes!
prepare to fire the main canon!
45 degrees to the top right-hand corner!
what happened?
canon commander, the tornadoes had caused control devices to break down!
all gun turrets can't turn!
what did you say?
ah!
it still can't turn?
it can't move here as well!
2-in-3 aircraft carrier.
captain.
hahaha,
continue to fire the instantaneous matter teleportation devices!
yes!
tail of vessel, area 5, damaged!
tail of vessel, area 3, damaged!
damn!
they only attack our damaged areas!
we can't continue this!
cosmo tigers, emergency take off!
taking off!
ah!
what?
ah!
l'm kato!
exit of the carrier vessel is damaged!
what?
how bad is the damage?
the exit's take off frame is shot!
we can't open it!
alright, use canons to attack instead!
cosmo tigers will be standing by!
commander, have you completed?
not yet!
alright, use canons as the main weapons!
lnform all members!
everyone, go to the gun turret!
fire laser bombs!
work unit!
repair the exit of the carrier exit!
damn!
watch this!
since we've reached here, just keep on firing!
hey, is the firing opening alright?
it's fine, firing preparations are completed too!
attack the large numbers of enemies with missiles!
for the nearby ones, use torpedoes!
success!
this is the 5th one!
damn!
l could do it too!
success!
serve you right!
damn!
we can't turn right!
kodai, get rid of the enemies quickly!
they're coming endlessly!
do you know if there's any shelter around?
hold on please!
there's a minor planet!
to the right, 2 o'clock direction!
right, pass under the planet to avoid enemy attacks!
switch on the screen!
turn right at 2 o'clock direction!
galman empire, dagon fleet.
commander dagon.
have we defeated yamato yet?
deputy captain's transmission has been received.
have we defeated yamato yet?
it's a pity, they've not been totally destroyed.
but their retaliating force has been reduced greatly.
so far so good.
using this chance, attack yamato with the main fleet!
alright, carrier vessels, return!
yes!
lnform all members!
now, it's the time to destroy yamato!
prepare for battle!
the enemy fleet has returned!
why have they stopped attacking?
the main fleet's coming!
main fleet?
the enemy's main fleet will definitely be here!
has the vessel's exit been repaired?
it's fully repaired!
can the gun turret turn now?
yes!
direction 9628!
8 kilometers away!
switch on the screen!
the aircraft carrier is powerful!
all gun turrets, prepare to fire!
cosmo tigers, prepare to take off!
until any further orders, stand by 1st.
yamato seems to have depleted their ammunition!
2-in-3 aircraft carrier, fly to the skies above yamato!
1st aircraft carrier, fly to the front!
2nd aircraft carrier, fly to the right!
3rd aircraft carrier, fly to the left!
be in your position!
captain, don't we fire now?
yamato's indeed a good battleship, it's a pity to be destroyed like this.
keep it intact and give it to general desslok as a souvenir!
lnform yamato to surrender in 2 minutes!
if they don't surrender, it'll be the final showdown!
heard that?
2 minutes!
damn!
they look down on us!
1st, 2nd and backup gun turrets, attack the aircraft carriers at the front, right and left side!
as for missiles, attack the 2-in-3 aircraft carrier above!
while firing missiles, attack the carrier vessel as well!
general, their time's up.
stupid yamato!
we'll beat it to a pulp!
start attacking!
all gun turrets, fire!
fire!
ah!
damn yamato!
yamato, take off!
look, it's successful!
dagon has fled!
good, fire the deadly attack!
yamato's chasing us.
that's better, l'll bring yamato to it's graveyard!
space shift!
it's space shift!
you think you can escape?
yamato's undergoing space shift!
hold on!
please don't stop!
if we don't need to destroy them now...
alright!
space shift!
cygnus, planet 61.
yamato's here?
hahaha!
l've been awaiting you!
fire laser rays!
ah!
what happened?
it's the tractor beams!
if we ignore them, we'll be dragged away!
no!
we can't pull it open!
there's a black hole in front!
what?
how can it be?
black hole?
it's the famous black hole of cygnus!
the space whirlpools were connected to the black hole's gravity!
black hole.
our enemy's strategy is to drag yamato into the black hole!
they'll suffer the same fate as well!
they want to bring us along!
damn!
do they want to die together with the yamato?
upper and lower flying discs of the flagship, separate!
drag yamato from both left and right!
separate together once you receive the order!
yes!
separate the flying discs!
separate into 2!
l understand!
captain, our enemy wants to drag us till the end... then separate from the 2 sides.
so they're not going to die with yamato!
they'll escape the black hole, only yamato will end up in there!
yamato will be going in directly!
that's what the enemy wants!
what can we do?
captain!
start the wave motion engine!
reverse firing!
yes!
we'll use the wave motion engine to reverse firing!
that's useless retaliation!
don't panic, yamato!
l'll bury you in the space graveyard in no time.
hahaha!
fire the main canon and laser canon!
target at the flying discs!
automatic tracking devices set up!
captain, canon attacks are useless!
the energy of the canon will be absorbed by the black hole!
then we'll be devoured by the black hole?
3 kilometers away from the black hole!
captain, fire wave motion canons at the black hole!
but, if we do this, the energy of the wave motion canons would also be...
no, look, there're different things the black hole absorbs!
if we fire one of the things, due to explosive impacts, it'll be able to disperse the tractor beams!
but if we don't hit it, we must stop all energy usage in the vessel to fire the wave motion canon.
we'll be absorbed even faster!
shima, we hope to escape death, it'll be better off than dying!
alright, recharge wave motion canon!
wave motion canon recharging!
stop all energy usage in the vessel!
wave motion canon recharged to 150º% !
good, remove safety plug of the wave motion canon!
30 seconds away from the black hole!
alright, preparation for tractor beams completed!
dodge to the right and left together upon completion!
prepare to fire wave motion canons!
defend against impacts and rays!
open the targeting device!
5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
fire!
ah!
completed!
yes!
galman empire, east forces headquarters.
what?
dagon's dead?
yamato's fearful!
it's seems to be time for me to get rid of you now!
hahaha!
president desslok, this time, l'll destroy yamato for you!
long live president desslok!
commander dagon's dead.
but, commander gaidel will attack
yamato anytime in attempt of revenge.
when can yamato find a minor planet that resembles earth?
from now till the end of all life, there're 283 more days to go.
283 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
stellar prison camp
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
fire!
hahaha!
capture yamato!
oh?
kodai, you must brace up!
don't worry, there's still me, the best doctor on earth!
at the centre of the milky way, the huge galactic nation, galman empire
attempts to rule the entire milky way.
galman empire east commander gaidel sent major frakken of galman wolf
to command 10 submarines to attack yamato.
fire!
space fortress
yamato actually escaped to this place!
all ships, attack yamato!
lure it to the space fortress!
then destroy it at one go!
yes!
captain, are you alright?
what happened?
did they attack?
yes, but we can't see them, so it's best not to take any actions.
mr sanada, is the sonar for the 2nd space completed?
ryusuke, just a bit more!
deputy shima, is captain alright?
he only hurt his right hand right?
we must trust doctor sado!
good, success!
yuki!
he needs to rest for the time being.
great!
captain!
return to your positions if there're no more problems.
don't worry.
give way!
don't block!
analyzer!
you're blocking as well!
let them be together!
yes!
yuki, please leave quickly!
kodai, how are you?
yuki, why am l here?
you're hurt in the 1st vessel bridge.
oh, yes.
you can't move!
yuki, please bring me to 1st vessel bridge!
if l weren't around...
what are you talking about?
even if you're not around,
mr sanada, shima and ryusuke can manage.
yamato isn't started by you only.
where are the enemies?
they seem to have stopped attacking.
he's not so hard to deal with as he seems.
you can hand it to us, just rest!
yuki, you better go back to your position as well!
l'm now a nurse.
it's inevitable to stay by my patient.
ln this journey, we're only
captain and lifestyle commander.
kodai, this is our promise.
l'm sorry, yuki.
but, we can finally be together, all because you're hurt.
and you can't move around as you like.
l'll be taking care of you while you're here.
don't say that...
see, l told you not to force yourself.
yuki...
oh yes, do it, captain.
how's captain?
just in time!
ln time?
what are you looking at?
oh, holding hands!
what?
let me see!
ah!
oh?
so...
so sorry!
captain, please take care!
please take care!
hahaha!
2nd space sonar.
great, it's completed!
the 2nd space sonar will be fixed here.
let me control in the 1st vessel bridge.
fix it immediately!
ls there any response?
unusual!
l've captured the chaotic scenes inside and outside yamato!
pay attention to the screen!
2nd ship, move to the front of yamato!
3rd ship, move to the back of yamato!
major frakken!
are you crazy?
if we move now, we will be detected!
there's no problem!
2nd ship, move to the front of yamato!
3rd ship, move to the back of yamato!
right!
aren't you doing something to salvage the situation?
oh?
what?
there's response!
2 of them!
one's in front of yamato at the 12 o'clock direction.
the other one's behind yamato at the 6 o'clock direction!
angle of 11 degrees!
prepare to fire wave motion canons!
fire the 1st one at 12 o'clock direction and the 2nd one behind!
angle of 11 degrees!
preparation for 1st and 2nd canons completed!
fire the wave motion canons!
it's a chance!
vessels 5 to 9, move in a g formation!
all gun turrets, fire at the emerged enemy!
success!
what?
ah!
oops!
the 1st 2 ships were a bait!
they used the time yamato's attacking to get closer to shooting range.
stop attacking!
lnform vessels 4 to 8 to escape towards the space fortress!
yes!
ordering vessels 4 to 8!
vessels 4 to 8, escape to the space fortress!
what?
the enemy's moving towards the 5 o'clock direction!
give chase!
we must destroy the enemy to escape this dangerous situation!
deputy shima, please!
gear room!
travel at full speed!
ok, engine in full power!
space fortress
commander gaidel, yamato is traveling towards the space fortress.
great, we'll lure it here!
the space fortress is approaching!
yes!
hahaha, yamato, looks like you're meeting your death!
but again, it's a great battleship!
l wish to see who're sitting in there!
travel at full speed!
yes!
travel at full speed!
ryusuke, enemy's 30 kilometers away!
prepare to attack!
yes!
wave motion canons...
what?
look at that!
what?
what's that?
oh?
it's a gigantic space fortress!
want to kill us with that?
prepare for battle!
faster!
prepare canon attacks!
dash across the skies of the enemy while we attack!
fire the main canon!
what?
oh?
we're not in time to stop or avoid!
shima, go to the bottom at the same speed!
yes!
damn!
hahaha!
yamato has finally fallen into the trap!
prepare to land!
what?
what has happened?
we can't see anything!
what has happened?
mr sanada, you mean...
don't talk!
calm down!
oh?
yamato's just in time!
oh?
it's younger than l expected.
l'm galman empire's east forces
commander gaidel.
galman... empire.
no matter what, l want to praise your courage and spirit.
everyone has become prisoners of this fortress.
prisoners?
after this, we'll go to earth together and you'll see the destruction of earth.
that's the my gift for your struggle.
just anticipate it!
hahaha!
damn!
l'm not willing to be a prisoner!
sanada, use the wave motion canon to destroy this place!
it's useless, look carefully!
there are hidden reflex boards here.
even if we fire, the canons will be reflected back, this will only cause yamato's self-destruction.
l believe that's a space magnetic wall!
based on these rays, whether it's wave motion canons or yamato, it's impossible to break through!
so, we'll become prisoners... l'm sorry, kodai.
yuki!
you're sweating a lot!
did you have a nightmare?
yuki, what happened?
the situation outside seems awkward.
analyzer is taking a look outside, it's be back soon.
doctor?
kodai, yuki, don't be shocked.
what happened?
yamato is imprisoned!
what?
l've to be in such a state at my age...
yamato's imprisoned?
captain...
captain, l can't account for your trust for me.
l've been too impulsive and reckless.
what are you saying?
ryusuke, you've been great.
you must brace up!
but, yamato's already...
yamato's already imprisoned...
don't give up!
no matter what happens, never give up!
no matter the outcome, you're only a man if you fight for the final victory!
that's the spirit of yamato!
captain kodai...
ryusuke, call kato here, bring me to 1st vessel bridge!
yes.
long live president desslok!
president desslok, we've captured the dreadful enemy that destroyed dagon's fleet.
so that's the fleet of the beautiful planet you were talking about?
yes, although it was hard to deal with,
galman empire.
what's the name of this battleship?
it's called space battleship yamato.
you say that again.
space battleship yamato.
it's the battleship of the earth fleet that... was planned to be a gift for the president.
why didn't you say it was yamato?
gaidel!
when did l say l want to attack yamato?
what?
when did l say l want to capture it?
l already said not to touch any planets at the outskirts of aureon!
sorry, because we had problems conquering berth.
that's enough.
l must contact yamato now!
transmit them to the screen!
yes!
it's a message from the enemy.
transmit it to the screen!
yes, captain?
everyone on yamato!
desslok?
galman empire, president desslok.
heard that you've become captain of yamato?
congratulations, kodai!
desslok, galman empire is your nation?
l've to apologize as a president.
heard that my subordinates attacked yamato on their own accord, resulting in today's situation.
forgive me, kodai.
l treat you and earth as friends.
l understand.
desslok, let's forget about this.
desslok, you're still full of vigour!
kodai, l would like to welcome you to galman empire, so as to apologize to you.
yamato's appearance could be due to some matters occurring on earth.
l wish to talk to you.
hope that you'll accept the invitation.
desslok, l'm willing to visit galman empire.
yuki, you're always with kodai.
l'll ask gaidel to lead.
l anticipate the day to meet you.
kodai realised by chance, that destiny could be really unimaginable.
yamato's going to visit galman empire, what would be awaiting them on theirjourney?
the solar system's facing extermination.
from now till the end of life, there's only 207 more days to go.
207 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
festive day for desslok
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
at the beginning of the 23rd century, nuclear fusion in the sun increased tremendously.
there's only 1 month to the end of earth and mankind.
although yamato went on a mission to search for a suitable planet,
they couldn't find a 2nd earth.
but, although guardiana's princess mariposa was met by chance, she gave the hydrocosmogen cannon to
yamato to control the sun.
yamato's rushing back from the 2nd space path.
now, it's traveling at the highest speed in subspace.
oh.
yuki, what's the estimated time we'll reach earth?
15 more hours.
you're sure it's flying towards the solar system right?
please let me handle it.
yamato, shoot that sun!
earth.
earth has become a burning hell, although mankind has moved to the underground cities, the final moment is still approaching.
space migration headquarters.
earth's temperature rose to 140 degrees.
underground cities' temperature is 34 degrees.
how much energy is left in the cooling system?
for full use, there's left of 3 days' supplies.
even if we reduce usage to 1/3, we can only sustain for 1 more month.
after that, even this place will... be over 70 degrees.
mankind will all end here.
officer.
where's yamato?
that ship...
yamato...
yamato?
yamato...
yamato, where are you?
yamato... lt's yamato!
what?
transmit it to the central screen!
oh?
yamato.
space battleship yamato has returned to the solar system.
oh, kodai...
although we're unable complete our mission of finding a 2nd earth, officer, please cheer up.
we obtained the sun-controlling
hydrocosmogen cannon from planet guardiana.
yamato... lndeed completed the expected job...
now we've to be fast.
l'll go to control the sun now.
sun, diameter 3.5 times the usual one.
prepare to fire hydrocosmogen cannon!
yes!
prepare to fire hydrocosmogen cannon!
hydrocosmogen cannon
undergoing the final check!
yes!
gear room!
how's the energy transmitting machine?
it's ok!
computer room!
please confirm the statistics!
no error!
preparation for firing completed!
alright, count down!
15 seconds before firing!
14, 13, 12, 11, 10,
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2,
ah!
it's the bolar federation fleet.
they used space shift to reach the nearby range.
what?
entire fleet, prepare for battle!
ryusuke, keep the hydrocosmogen cannon!
yes!
ah!
damn!
mechanical fortress appearing behind enemy fleet!
what?
show it on the screen!
bolar federation, mechanical fortress
hahaha!
sir bemlaze.
yamato, l'll present earth's death as a gift for you!
fire black hole bomb!
shima, escape!
yes!
gear room!
move forward in maximum-powered engine!
oh?
it's the maximum!
dreadful weapons!
use the little black hole to suck all the surrounding things in, then destroy it!
black hole?
captain!
what happened?
nearly 100 big battleships are approaching!
unknown nationality!
what?
fire desslok bomb!
target at bolar federation fleet!
desslok!
we can move now!
oh, this black hole effect has a time limit!
it's losing its effects!
desslok's on the line!
kodai!
desslok!
it's my dream to defeat bolar federation.
l'll handle the battle here, you'll fire at the sun immediately!
thank you, desslok.
then, we'll meet after the victory!
ryusuke, open the hydrocosmogen cannon!
yes!
kato!
yes!
all battleships, prepare to attack anytime!
talan!
yes.
fire desslok bomb!
target bemlaze's flagship, the mechanical fortress!
fire the 2nd attack of desslok bomb!
target at prime minister bemlaze's flagship!
hahaha!
desslok!
you came at the right time!
we don't care about yamato!
our aim is to lure you here!
you've fallen into our trap!
desslok!
ln the battle of 2 leaders, it's my honour to be welcomed.
just in case, l'll have to ask you.
how long should your funeral last?
sir bemlaze
you should be the one holding a funeral!
fire black hole bomb!
general!
our fleet is almost gone!
this is?
hahaha!
cosmo tigers, attack!
ryusuke, you've yet to open it?
captain, the protective opening system is not working!
what?
probably it broke down after the impact!
l'll check it out!
ryusuke, it's very dangerous!
come back!
ryusuke!
damn!
oh?
ryusuke!
talan, you're my subordinate!
act like one!
oh?
yes!
but... lf we don't think of a way to manage that black hole bomb...
damn!
mariposa guardiana!
please protect me!
mariposa guardiana?
mariposa!
l...
l love you.
hamu!
did you see that?
talan!
the youth of earth... used blood to let the flower bloom!
yes!
don't let that flower die innocently!
fire ultimate desslok bomb!
it's this one!
kodai, you can come out now!
it's a chance!
alright.
kodai!
yes.
yuki!
yes!
come and give me a hand!
yes!
step on my hand, then pray hard for this attack to save earth!
kodai!
counting down!
10 seconds before firing!
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1!
fire!
dad, mum, l've succeeded!
ryusuke!
captain...
lifestyle commander...
thank you for taking care of me... l wish you both happiness...
ryusuke!
salute to the soul of ryusuke domon!
farewell, ryusuke.
mariposa, guardiana.
captain kodai, wars only leave behind sadness.
do you understand it now?
yes!
peace is never to battle and this determination must be sustained even if you'll be killed.
the battle with your own self is tougher than that with your enemy.
l understand it deeply now.
although l don't know if l can do it, l'll try my best.
that's great.
it's all because of that, that l give a future to earth.
l'll return to planet guardiana now
with dear hamu's soul.
kodai!
congratulations, kodai!
earth is revived!
thank you, desslok.
but, the battle to obtain true peace begins now.
perhaps.
farewell, kodai!
we'll meet in future!
farewell, desslok!
yamato, set off towards earth!
30 days to the end of mankind.
the sun regained its the form that has brought hope to mankind.
although the story of yamato 3 has ended,
yamato will continue to battle for peace.
from the time yamato was created, next year, it'll be the 10th year.
this will be the last production, in order to commemorate yamato's story in these 10 years.
please look forward to the summer of year 1982.
farewell for now.
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
at the beginning of the 23rd century, due to the increase of nuclear fusion in the sun,
earthers will risk the danger of being exterminated in 1 year.
earth for the survival of all mankind.
but on the way, it got involved in the galactic war.
after battling commander dagon from galman time and again,
yamato gained victory and could continue its mission.
stellar prison camp
galman empire
the leader of galman empire is
yamato's enemy, president desslok.
general, l represent our people to congratulate on your victories on the eastern and southern areas.
it's the achievements of the 2 armies.
l need to thank them too.
it's been hard on both generals.
yes.
gaidel!
yes!
heard that my gift, the new aircraft carriers fleet were destroy.
it wasn't expected, l'm sorry.
don't be sorry, most planet on the galaxy have improved.
l've known about the difficulties during battles long before this.
still, it's still a feat to be able
general!
l place high hopes on you, so l'll give you a stronger fleet as a gift!
thank you very much!
gaidel, l wish to see the beautiful planet you discovered.
earth is gradually showing signs of being destroyed.
the sun looks 2 times larger than usual.
south pole.
ice at south pole is melting, causing the sea level to rise.
seasides of cites
tokyo
although the sun has set, the night still remains bright.
although it's winter, it seems like autumn.
general di
but earth federation government has yet to inform the earthers that
earth would be destroyed in 1 year.
officer kato!
yes!
after failing to control solar energy, l can only expand on the plan to explore the minor planets.
l think so too.
thus, l'll start a space migration headquarters, with space developing
capital as the centre, so l hope you'll be the headquarters officer.
which means l've to resign now.
it's a tough job.
grandfather, if l have nothing to do?
you?
can l work with you?
l'll put in my best!
alright.
anyway, we need to contact yamato.
showara seems to be from communications unit.
what?
l don't plan to do that...
hahaha!
space developing capital.
with considerations of the distance the spacecrafts need to travel, exploration range must be within a radius of 15,000 light years.
asia, africa, europe, north and south america, each continent will carry out explorations at specific areas.
now asia will be in charge of the milky way area,
battleship yamato's in the process of exploration.
from now on, exploration crafts will have battleships along with them for safety reasons.
conditions for a suitable minor planet:
1, having same atmosphere as earth.
2, possess human necessities, that is, plentiful water, food and minerals.
3, be in the range where all mankind can migrate to immediately.
4, temperature must be suitable for human survival and and gravity must be close to earth's.
5, must be a same type of planet as the sun.
6, must not be in historical records.
if any of the conditions are not met, mankind can't migrate to that place!
exploration crafts.
with orders from headquarters officer
shiro, set off immediately//for the... mission to ensure survival of mankind.
prince of wales.
there're only 7 months left.
all docks have prepared exploration crafts.
battleship arizona.
all protection battleships are sent to appointed harbours.
battleship bismarck.
battleship norweige.
yamato, that has left earth.
for nearly 2 months, is traveling at 1,500 light years away from space.
earth defense force is on the line!
transmit it to the screen!
yes!
everyone on yamato!
officer!
it's been a long time!
heard that there were victims in the battle, how are things now?
a galactic war seems to be ongoing in some part of space, we've crossed the danger zone already.
that's good.
may the victims rest in peace.
we've set up a space migration headquarters!
oh, general has finally taken action?
l'll take care of the headquarters.
yamato will be part of this organization.
l understand.
l've explored nearly 13 planets, all are deemed unsuitable for migration.
now we're exploring planet 4.
oh, exploration crafts from all over earth will take off too.
do your best!
l understand.
the future of mankind will depend on all of you, we're counting on you!
federation government seems to be starting formal explorations now.
we can't lose to other crafts.
we must use yamato to find the minor planet.
you're so fortunate to be so free.
cosmo tigers are fully prepared, when there's no battle, we'll be like this.
l'm the busiest at these times.
what are you doing?
it's the food preparation plan, there're loads of onions!
what a headache!
l was 1st for shooting in training school, to think that l worry for food now!
captain's really not far-sighted.
ryusuke, come to the food production room!
yes!
we're real busy!
food production room.
what happened?
we are left with only 2 days' fresh food supplies.
why?
we should have produced enough!
the cold storage has broken down, all ingredients have decomposed.
what?
ln the previous battle, the freezer's temperature controller was destroyed.
it has broken down?
planet berth
planet 4.
500 kilometers away from planet 4.
cosmohound, prepare to take off.
what's the matter?
enemy fleet discovered at the right of yamato!
what did you say?
ah!
cosmohound, stop flying!
turn 30 degrees to the right!
captain, let cosmo tigers set off!
hold on!
this kind of attacks seem to be a trial of their strength.
showara, send signals to them!
this is earth defense force's
yamato.
this is earth's...
we've got a response!
decipher it!
alright, we're space battleship yamato, flying from the 3rd planet of solar system, that's 1,500 light years away.
please stop all attacks!
l'm defense commander balkam from planet berth.
planet berth, defense commander balkam.
we didn't realise you were our greatest benefactor,
space battleship yamato.
we apologize for attacking you.
please forgive us.
benefactor?
yes.
berth's fleet has been destroyed in the solar system unfortunately.
so, legendra's captain ram is?
yes, we received captain ram's telegraph, and we know they were aided by yamato.
we appreciate your kindness, if you require any help, just mention it!
we've two requests, 1, to check yamato fleet's equipment.
2, collect plants.
alright, l'll permit you to stop by for 3 days.
any human staying in planet berth?
4th planet berth.
highest temperature in berth is 5 degrees.
atmospheric and mineral formation and food distribution is more obvious than earth.
l sincerely welcome yamato.
thank you for your kindness.
general balsky wants to see all of you.
we'll throw a welcome party later, hope that you can attend.
l'm willing to accept the invitation.
the air is fresher than earth!
wow!
coercive refugee camp
what are you doing?
we're permitted by defense commander to collect plants from here!
no, this is a prohibited zone!
go back!
what?
ryusuke, we'll return first for today.
rude soldiers!
what kind of place is that?
it must be a coercive refugee camp.
though l don't know what crimes they've done, they're all working under torture.
that's cruel!
we seem to have seen things we shouldn't have seen.
although l've seen that in history books, it's really shocking to know that there's coercive refugee camps today.
this is planet berth, perhaps they're less civilised than earth.
there're very little residents here, maybe this is a prison.
where were they from?
this is what l don't understand.
there should be a planet suitable for survival near planet berth!
should we take another look?
for what?
nothing, it's just worth noticing.
to have a stellar prison here, we might have landed on a planet that has ulterior actions.
now, we'll set off to attend the welcome party by berth's general.
everyone who has no missions, please attend!
that's great!
then we can drink!
ls there liquor on this planet?
of course!
how to survive without that?
l agree!
oh?
welcome to planet berth!
l'm general balsky.
general balsky
planet berth became an independent nation about 10 years ago.
but due to attacks from everywhere, we can't remain independent.
we had to ask for help from
bolar federation, with planet berth as the main nation.
bolar federation?
this is the 1st time everyone heard of it?
please look!
bolar federation is 35,000 light years away from planet berth.
it's a galactic nation that's expanding in the galaxy.
everyone from earth, l'll use this chance, hoping that we'll build a friendly relationship
with you.
welcome!
sounds pleasant.
they must have conquered this planet.
l think so too.
l think they're suspicious.
for the friendly ties between earth and bolar federation, cheers!
cheers!
bolar federation?
l never expected such a huge galactic nation at the edge of space.
it's there?
it would be good if we could talk to the prisoners.
security's too tight, it's impossible.
routine check, everything's fine!
what's that?
prisoners.
forced to work on this planet.
prisoners?
l've looked in the refugee camp, there're many people inside.
so this planet is a stellar prison?
l just feel that this planet is a wet blanket.
oh?
mother guardiana!
guardiana, that's a mysterious planet that is full of love and peace... that rules planets in the galaxy thousands of years ago.
that nation's mostly ruled by the queen.
she has been protecting space with her goddess-like authority.
but her powers gradually lessened, so galman empire and bolar federation
now rules all the planets.
still, queen guardiana will always remain in the hearts of everyone.
oh?
oh!
what?
ah!
what?
ah!
don't move!
you...
who are you?
l'll shoot if you move!
what're you trying to do?
we want to take over this battleship!
get ready to take off!
what are you saying?
this is the gear room!
prisoners have taken over the gear room!
ah!
make yamato take off in 10 minutes!
this is an order!
if you don't follow orders, all hostages in the gear room will be killed!
what?
mysterious planet berth.
what is the real identity of their ruler, bolar federation?
what's the goal of the prisoners who had taken over yamato?
yamato has faced new danger again.
from now till the end of all life, there're 228 more days to go.
228 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
dreadful bolar federation
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
oh, l'm counting on you!
it's connected already!
you're fast!
of course!
this is communication officer showara's daily leisure!
this is space migration headquarters.
this is headquarters... lt's the routine communication time!
yes!
please hold on!
you scoundrel.
space migration headquarters.
new planet exploration control room.
you've waited for long.
this is the busiest time for space migration headquarters.
it's been hard on you.
forgive me for being direct.
kodai, report to us.
yesterday, yamato traveled towards
the centre of the milky way, 12,000 kilometres away from earth, direction 170.4.
although we had inspected planet n808, we realised it's not suitable for
human survival due to low oxygen content in the air.
oh, is it?
continue your search then!
routine communication completed.
number of unsuitable planets just keep on increasing.
other exploration fleets should be taking off soon.
grandfather, right?
don't call me grandfather at work!
l'm sorry.
it expanded 2 times.
it has been 3 months since yamato has set off to search for the 2nd earth.
yamato, we count on you.
subspace submarine captain:
galman wolf
galman wolf captain, frakken
we're here!
it's the east forces headquarters!
east forces commanding department
you've not been here for a long time, we'll have a good drink tonight!
fool, commander gaidel has issued an emergency summon!
you think that's for drinking?
l see, they seem to need galmon wolf's
captain ferrel so much,
commander gaidel must have something important in mind.
you've finally understood?
yes.
galman wolf will report now.
l've brought major frakken here!
commander gaidel!
frakken, you come at the right time.
oh yes, l should call you galman wolf.
call me wolf or anything.
hold on, you can have a drink too.
l understand, commander.
take your time.
frakken, this is yamato!
yamato?
where's this battleship from?
earth!
earth?
l don't know about it.
it's a planet on the outskirts of aureon.
it's no wonder you don't know about it.
l didn't know about it at first.
what's about the yamato?
dagon's defeated.
it can't be, you're lying.
yes, he still died despite the aircraft carriers and new weapons l gave him.
that commander dagon actually...?
and yamato's traveling towards the centre of the milky way.
that is the space region conquered by the east forces of our galman empire.
l've decided to deal with yamato by myself.
commander gaidel's dealing it by yourself?
yes, yamato is that strong!
so l need you, frakken, no, galman wolf.
l hope you can be my right-hand man.
galman wolf will be commander gaidel's most loyal right-hand man!
alright, is subspace submarine, galman wolf still fine?
it can set off anytime!
destroy yamato immediately!
use space shift to meet yamato!
oh?
captain!
you need not salute at this time!
yes!
lifestyle unit, how is the job of cooking?
looks like we can be chefs even if we lose ourjobs.
hahaha, such a talented member like you won't be sacked by me!
you asked me why l was sent to lifestyle unit, right?
l'm used to it.
no matter what job it is, there's also a value for it.
ls it?
you don't have to act noble.
l'm not.
l'm glad enough to have been on cosmohound and involved in the numerous battles.
you seemed to have matured.
l hope you can learn more things.
do you understand?
yes, l do.
yamato is 2,000 kilometers away!
all ships, attack from space fault zone,
yamato, don't be surprised!
haha!
starting space fault device!
lncrease energy of wave motion engine!
energy transmitted to space fault device!
preparation completed!
galman wolf, start the attack!
we've discovered yamato!
direction 350.
100 kilometers away!
all ship, submerge!
prepare to fire space torpedoes!
3rd ship fully prepared!
8th ship fully prepared!
10th ship fully prepared!
start the countdown!
yes!
5 seconds before firing!
4, 3, 2, 1, 0!
fire!
everyone, stay in position!
ah!
shima, control properly!
damn!
do you know the enemy's position?
there're no enemies approaching as shown in the statistics!
we were attacked so closely, how could there be no response?
totally none!
could it be damaged by the impact?
there's nothing wrong anywhere!
how can it be?
hahaha!
hahaha, 1st attack succeeded!
no wonder you're galman wolf!
prepare the 2nd torpedo attack!
don't block me!
why do you walk around here?
oh, l'm sorry, if the food is burnt...
ah!
what?
big news!
what?
you saw a periscope?
you mean there's a submarine?
yes!
what's underneath?
what's under the periscope?
this is not the sea!
there's nothing!
what?
nothing?
it's gone!
it seemed to have dived into a different dimension33!
a different dimension33?
probably!
although l thought it was transported by matter-teleportation devices, but looking at the video tape, the sequence for the appearance of torpedoes isn't enough!
it must have used other methods to reach here!
ls it space shift?
if the enemies are in a different dimension, then yamato has entered there too...
that's true, but a different dimension...
shima, although our enemies dived into a different dimension
perhaps it's different from the one in space shift.
if it's a submarine,
but we have no way to find out the identity of our enemy.
ryusuke, you're so talented!
gee, because l majored in 3333 battles.
ls it?
recently, the space warrior training school seems to teach everything!
then, undergo space shift immediately!
then, l'll take my leave first.
ryusuke!
yes!
you'll sit there!
oh?
you'll be my strategist!
l wish to use the knowledge you have!
it's also our first time!
you must help captain!
yes!
l'll do my best!
all ships, prepare for space shift!
l think it's most effective to use wave motion canons in the different dimension!
alright, canon unit!
when space shift is completed, prepare to fire wave motion canons!
yes!
move forward with full force!
2nd space torpedo attacks completed!
yamato seems to be undergoing space shift!
what?
stop the torpedo attacks!
all ships, rise up to the usual space!
10 seconds before space shift!
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1, 0!
space shift!
don't let it escape!
all ships, undergo space shift!
our enemy has appeared!
direction eh3!
they're 15 kilometers away!
that's very near!
alright, prepare wave motion canons!
be fast!
all ships, submerge and prepare torpedo attacks!
what?
captain, they chased over using space shift, which means, they weren't submarines traveling in the different dimension.
l believe when the enemy approaches, a fault zone emerged and they created a 2nd space to hide in there.
he's right.
if we want to capture our enemies that can't be seen, it'll be best to create sonar for the 2nd space.
since that's the case, mr sanada, please create the sonar for the 2nd space immediately!
l understand!
l'll create it now!
counting down space torpedo attack!
fire wave motion canons towards 15 kilometers away from yamato!
ah!
this is 3rd ship!
we're shot!
what?
fire the 3rd main canon!
fire space torpedoes continuously!
ah!
hahaha!
yamato, just die!
nambu!
prepare the 2nd canon attack!
ah!
what?
captain!
captain kodai!
captain?
captain kodai has collapsed.
no enemy is seen approaching yamato.
nuclear fusion in the sun is indeed increasing incredibly and the solar system's facing extermination.
where should mankind go?
from now till the end of life, there's only 207 more days to go.
207 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
yamato's captured!
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
the result of the increase of nuclear fusion in the sun is...
with the increase of nuclear fusion on the sun, mankind face the risk of extermination.
ln order to search for a minor planet, yamato took off.
galman empire, desslok palace.
and they met galman-gamilon's president desslok again.
desslok offered to use galman-gamilon's technology to control the sun.
under the command of major frausky,
galman-gamilon work crafts set out towards earth.
sun control workcraft.
sanada and showara went along.
the angry sun
1,000 kilometers away from the solar system!
oh?
wow!
that's huge!
it's not even half a year...
nuclear fusion is indeed accelerating in the sun and the diameter has expanded 2.5 times.
major frausky.
showara, contact earth immediately!
yes!
space migration headquarters.
calling from workcraft!
ok, transmit it to the screen!
yes!
workcraft will reach skies of saturn in 30 minutes!
we hope to start controlling from here.
l understand, l'll meet you there.
major frausky, l sincerely welcome you.
thank you.
l'll do my best to have the sun under control.
l believe it'll succeed.
sanada, thank you for your hard work.
galman-gamilon's technology is mighty.
the sun control plan is perfect too.
the way you say it makes you even more confident.
l never thought we'll meet so soon.
it was captain kodai who took care of me.
that fellow's a very caring person.
oh, you call him 'that fellow'.
if we succeed in controlling the sun,
yamato will return from galman immediately.
we'll succeed, the beautiful earth can't be destroyed.
the seasons will return again and everyone can discuss future again.
we think so too.
yes.
oh?
it's the wild chrysanthemums yamato picked up from south cross island before departure.
l have them too.
showara, start the controlling job now!
l'll take my leave now.
l'll be waiting for your return.
the workcraft teams divided into 2, one will be led by frausky to the sun,
the other led by sanada to the minor planets region.
before leaving, l'll repeat and confirm the things to do.
our mission is to attract rocks from the minor planet to this 100 metres magnetic system.
using space shift, we'll then let it approach the path of comet.
using that speed increase, let it dash through the sun.
our mission ends here.
venus.
all ships, get prepared.
2nd ship anchoring at @2!
4th ship anchoring at @4!
we're starting soon.
l really can't stay in yamato looking at that workcraft.
that workcraft would complete yamato's mission.
frausky will be successful.
you just look carefully at our technology.
2nd ship prepared to fire!
3rd ship prepared to fire!
all ships, fire!
the magnetic field will detect when the sun will radiate high heat.
once detected, it would prevent the heat from leaking out.
thus, lowering its temperature!
galman-gamilon's really great!
it's so cooling now!
it's gradually getting cooler now!
officer, the atmospheric temperature is decreasing!
no, we can't be too positive.
minor planet region.
on the other hand, sanada's leading the 2nd workcraft, working steadily on the minor planets.
magnetic attraction completed for planet 1 to 5 pipes.
fire the planet pipes towards the sun!
yes!
fire the planet pipes!
2nd workcraft team, pass through the path of mars.
our ship and planet pipes, undergo space shift!
undergo space shift!
2nd workcraft, planet pipes, undergo space shift!
it's time!
space shift completed!
now we're 800 kilometers from the path of venus!
this is sanada from 2nd workcraft, we've reached the device-fixing point in the path of venus.
the minor planet pipes are traveling towards sun via the path of mercury.
thank you.
start working on the 3rd project b!
counting on you.
undergo the 3rd project b!
prepare to fire proton missiles!
yes!
prepare to fire proton missiles!
the minor planet pipes will reach its destination in 12 minutes!
general di.
general, it's the last stage to
control the nuclear fusion in the sun.
l'll explain the last stage of the project, please acknowledge it.
alright.
just like the previous strategy, the minor planet pipes would hit the
sun and before flames break out, nuclear fusion plasma in the proton
missiles would control it in the sun.
officer kato, l wish you success.
15,000 kilometers away from the sun!
how's the route to the sun?
we've corrected it 3.3 degrees to the right!
minor planet pipes 5 minutes away from the sun!
0.5 degrees to the sun!
2nd ship's preparation completed for proton missiles firing!
3rd ship's preparation completed!
4th ship's preparation completed for proton missiles firing!
it's the last stage.
plasma injection completed!
automatic tracking device started!
safety lock opened!
correct the path of the minor planet pipes 1.8 degrees to the left!
5,000 kilometers away from the sun!
fire proton missiles!
everything's right!
it's dashing through soon!
seems like a success.
oh?
major!
what?
the sun's temperature?
what?
lnform all ships!
retreat to the safety zone!
quickly!
use all the propellers to spray!
officer, the sun's temperature is rising!
surface temperature of 6,800 degrees!
7,000 degrees!
nuclear fusion is happening again!
what?
this is impossible!
our technology can't even control the sun!
stop!
major, it's dangerous to stop now!
just stop!
you think we can return like this?
but... lnform all members!
leave the ship now!
major!
faster!
or l'll order to kill you!
we've escaped the danger zone!
oh!
deputy sanada!
major frausky's ship?
major!
major frausky!
sanada!
it's a pity!
l can't repay the trust president desslok has put on me.
l can't return to galman-gamilon!
what are you talking about?
major?
please tell the president, frausky has done his best!
don't apologize!
major!
it's not your fault and responsibility!
it's just an extra service!
thank you, sanada!
goodbye, please apologize to captain kodai on my behalf!
major frausky!
l too wish to see earth regaining its beauty.
major frausky!
desslok!
kodai, l'm sorry to let earth down.
the natural world in space is just so harsh.
desslok, thank you for your kindness.
regarding major frausky, l sincerely pray for him.
he took on the responsibility very well!
he's indeed our empire's soldier!
after sanada's back, we'll set off to explore the planets.
kodai, our technology may be unable to overcome earth's sun, but my ambition to rule space will never change!
l hope you can find the new earth!
thank you.
galman-gamilon's failure, represents our failure.
but we can't blame desslok.
we're starting our endless journey again.
mother starsha!
who are you?
we're not from dubious backgrounds, we're members of space battleship yamato.
please tell us, we've met your people.
does lscandar really exist?
yes!
that's the queen's most powerful planet a few thousand years ago, in the milky way.
l'm praying for her to suppress the chaos in space.
does the queen really exist?
it's the police!
escape!
3 days later, after numerous space shifts, the workcraft returned.
president, yamato's captain kodai transmitted his farewell message.
transmit it to the screen!
yes!
desslok, thank you for your care in this long period of time.
as we need to rush off, l'll use this chance to thank you.
l wanted you to stay for a longer time, but l don't think it's possible now.
l'm glad to have met you.
l wish to ask you something...
why must you suppress planet starsha?
kodai, galman-gamilon does not require two lords.
oh yes, kodai, l've a good news.
our observation station spotted a planet similar to earth.
what?
a same type of planet?
that planet is 100,000 light years from here which is called phantom.
according to the observation station's report, there weren't any prehistoric organisms on it.
the living conditions are the same as earth's as well.
everyone, go quickly!
l anticipate the day l'll meet all of you again.
thank you, desslok!
l'll never forget your friendship.
set off to phantom!
yamato's rushing over to phantom, can it be the 2nd earth?
can kodai and desslok's friendship remain unchanged forever?
from now till the end of life, there's only 153 more days to go.
153 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
on the way to planet phantom
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
with the increase of nuclear fusion on the sun, all life will be exterminated in 1 year.
3 years later, the sun will undergo supernova and explode.
planet alpha centauri
thus earth sent yamato in search for a planet to migrate to.
planet alpha centauri, planet 4.
taking into consideration the ability for continuous navigation, the search range was limited to a radius of 15,000 light years from earth.
as news of galman empire fleet.s attacks were received,
yamato set off to planet 4 of alpha centauri.
although they were on guard, they were still attacked by enemy.s missiles.
the missiles were fired from barnard star.
the last pioneer
on earth, efforts to control the increase of nuclear fusion in the sun is ongoing.
earth federation, solar capital
solar capital, commanding room.
observation department, professor kuroshida
solar energy is transmitted over now, what we control, making use of the solar energy station, that is,
transmitting cold rays towards the sun to cool it down, reducing the
nuclear fusion effects.
professor kuroshida, the cold rays are ready.
good, countdown now!
10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1, 0.
fire!
solar energy transmitting system.
moon transmitting base.
mercury transmitting base.
solar energy collection base.
what...
what happened?
what?
solar energy system had exploded!
according to reports from mercury transmitting base, all other bases around the sun are exploding too!
what?
l believe it.s due to overheating of the cold ray installation!
stop emitting the cold rays!
yes!
barnard star.
barnard star.s 5.9 light years away from the solar system, surface temperature of 3,000 degrees.
1/4 brightness of the sun.
thus planet 1 .s temperature is very close to that of earth.s.
planet 1.
at the bottom of planet 1, there lies dagon.s fleet base.
dagon was defeated once by yamato when it protected legendra from berth.
planning his revenge, dagon fired missiles as a bait to lure
yamato to planet 1.
yamato, l.ll make you a gift for president desslok this time.
what?
lt.s as if it.s an ice mountain, formed by crystal-like rocks.
although the temperature.s low, but it.s possible for human survival.
this is the 1st choice in the exploration plan, anyway, let.s explore the land first.
but we don.t see any thing that resembles an enemy.s base!
the place the missiles were fired was nearby.
that.s weird.
captain, l can hear signals from this planet.
signal.s from 62 degrees to the west!
at route 47!
captain, this could be a trap.
right, let.s land to make sure.
ordering all members from lifestyle unit, exploration unit and combat unit to land.
gear department will bring 2 members under tokugawa along.
thank you very much.
you are here already?
l received gear commander.s signal.
l.m really nervous for l can land here.
tokugawa!
yes!
as before, you must stay in the cosmo hound!
this is your 1st flight, so you must have an engine test!
alright!
tse...
ouch!
lt.s painful!
hahaha!
yoshikazu, look out for signals from land.
yes!
ah!
lt.s a rainbow!
how beautiful!
lifestyle unit, start exploring now!
yes!
combat unit will move towards the source of signal!
yes!
l want to go as well!
alright!
what?
hide!
what?
enemies!
that.s a radar gun!
there.s metal in that direction!
oh!
found it!
come with me!
don.t run!
stop!
what?
earthers!
hubby!
lt.s daddy!
oops!
you are doing this again!
silly!
damn!
ah!
captain, signals from yamato!
yoshikazu!
the signal just disappeared!
ok!
it must be here!
could it be the old man calling for help?
captain!
any problems?
yes, the source of signal seems to be here!
don.t move!
another step and l.ll shoot!
l won.t be merciful.
we.re earthers too, not unknown people!
earthers?
yes!
we received signals from here, so the explorers came here!
so what if you are from earth?
earth is a dreadful place!
no matter you are earthers or whatever, leave my planet immediately!
save me!
stupid!
please save me!
please?
ryusuke, call for emergency vessel!
yes!
you silly one!
dagon.s base is beneath this planet.
commanding headquarters... in the underground dock.
they.ve captured yamato and preparing to attack.
alright, show it on the screen.
the new reflex guns aren.t the same as the previous ones, that depend on battle satellites to fire.
now they have reflex boards on the planes in the sky, awaiting orders to surround the target 360 degrees.
then, reflecting laser rays transmitted from the ground to their base.
oh.
the reflection system shift as yamato docks, thus you won.t know your position unless you destroy them.
commander dagon, yamato has yet to discover this base.
hahaha!
damn yamato!
continue being reckless!
we.ll destroy you this time!
reflex boards on planes, take off!
reflex guns, prepare to fire!
yes!
number 1, towards northeast!
number 2, towards further northeast!
number 1, take off!
reflex boards on planes.
reflex guns.
doctor sado.
this is the 1st time l.ve seen such a patient in such conditions.
it should be a unique illness on this planet.
doctor, is there any way to cure him?
the entire body seems to be infected.
we can.t render treatment here.
we need to bring him to yamato.
can you tell us why are you here on this planet?
yes, we are...
we moved here with father 5 years ago because of his zest to develop planets no one has been to.
but one day, my husband collapsed due to a sudden fever while hunting.
his condition worsens gradually.
he often thinks of the earth while he was recuperating.
he only talked about his memories of earth.
but father is determined to stay here so he ignited our rocket.
we sent out the signal without father.s knowledge.
stop saying that!
yoko , so what if you say that?
father, let return to earth!
no, l.ll not allow!
ah!
why don.t you want to return?
l.ve disregarded earth, this is my hometown!
no, you must return to earth.
l won.t go back.
why did l spend so much efforts till now?
l don.t want to be a despicable person or a stray cur!
you are not!
you.ve fought hard on this planet!
captain, how is his son?
doctor?
hubby!
these are?
they are earthers.
earth...
so we.re back.
what?
yes, we.re back on earth.
together?
you and me and father.
ls it so?
lt.s so great!
lt.s so great...
yoko...
hubby!
forgive me!
go back to earth, bury our son properly
father!
l wish to go back to earth... l wish to return to earth, the place with ryoko.s graveyard.
father...
what?
father.s having a fever?
father.s having a fever!
that.s bad, send him to yamato!
preparations for firing of reflex guns completed!
reflex boards on planes in place!
good, you shall see the power of the reflex guns!
target at yamato!
fire!
reflex gun output percentage,
80!
100!
lock the target!
number 2, correct position by 2.5 degrees.
reflex boards in place!
l.m kodai!
we.ve completed our exploration of barnard star.
return now!
we.ve patients in the emergency vessel.
prepare medical room.s inspection machine.
yes!
hahaha.
what.s the matter?
enemy.s attacking!
shima, it.s laser rays!
someone.s shooting us!
this is the enemy.s base!
ok, take in the emergency vessel!
l.ll use cosmo hound to explore the enemy.s base!
yes!
shima, isn.t this the reflex gun?
l think so too.
that.s desslok.s weapon!
how can it...
desslok.s attacking yamato...
we must destroy the satellite.
return to yamato as soon as you find the base.
yes!
counting on you, captain!
thunder, from the angle of light, the base is beneath the planet.
go fast!
yes!
hahaha!
damn yamato!
escape!
lt.s sure agonizing!
escape now while you can!
yamato.s finally fallen into commander dagon.s trap.
galman empire.s commander dagon used powerful weapons, the reflex guns, to destroy yamato.
can yamato survive the attack?
from now till the end of all life, there.re 308 more days to go.
308 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
battle at barnard star
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
at the beginning of the 23rd century,
president desslok of galman sent 7 fleets to the galaxy, in the
attempt to conquer the entire space.
east commander gaidel of galman empire was sent to the outskirts of earth,
to concentrate the army fleet.
under his command, the 18th mechanised armoured division led by commander dagon are just 1 step away from earth.
they even tried to invade planet berth.
planet berth fleet
the missile fired by dagon.s fleet went missing in the sun.
nuclear fusion in the sun began to increase and all living things will die in 1 year.s time.
after knowing that, earth defense officer sent
yamato to search for a suitable planet to migrate to.
yamato took off, for the survival of all mankind.
ln order to invade earth,
dagon.s fleet attacked yamato.
yamato destroyed their enemy.s fleet in the battle.
commander dagon led the rest of the fleet and escaped to the edge of space.
yamato.s traveling out of the solar system.
the rough seas of alpha centauri
planet brumas
any spaceship that takes off from
earth would undergo the practice of throwing coins so as to ensure a safe return.
find a new planet quickly so that people can put their minds at rest.
yes!
but the sun is bringing a dreadful destiny to mankind.
south pole.
earth federation general di.
facing the abnormal occurrences,
earth federation is discussing for a solution.
earth federation general.
professor kuroshida, there are weird happenings everywhere.
solar capital, please investigate the situation on the sun.
solar capital.
professor kuroshida.
perhaps l made a mistake.
l.ll search for a solution for the abnormal situation on the sun.
please do.
captain, we can.t repair as we travel.
the damage is rather serious, we need to land on a planet for reparations.
or else, we won.t know what can happen on ourjourney beyond the solar system.
l hope yamato remain in the best shape.
captain kodai, we received a sos signal!
from where?
planet 4 of planet alpha centauri.
perhaps they were attacked by enemies.
shima, rush to alpha centauri now!
what are we going to do there?
our mission is to find a new planet as soon as possible.
we.ve no choice, it.s a sos signal.
yamato didn.t take off for battles.
we have no time to be involved in unnecessary battles!
but...
shima, it.s dangerous to travel in this current manner.
alpha centauri has a small scale reparation equipments.
but we don.t know details of the sos.
we could be surrounded by enemies when we are repairing.
whatever it is, go to alpha centauri first.
if we don.t repair, it would be too dangerous to travel outside the
solar system!
heard that you had a tiff with shima?
recently we often have differing ideas.
he.s impatient, because we need to find a new planet, yet we get involved in battles.
we.re from the same batch, perhaps it.s not a good idea that l became the captain.
that.s not the case.
everyone feels that you are the most suitable one.
you are too sensitive.
we had gone through life and death in yamato many times.
we all work hand in hand!
yes.
planet alpha centauri.
4.3 light years from the solar system.
lt.s the closest planet to the solar system.
but this planet,
planet alpha centauri, has a stringent environment, thus isn.t suitable for human survival.
º%
no sign of enemies around planet 4 of alpha centauri.
don.t be reckless, remain in state of battle while we land.
signal received from the land!
what?
decipher the message!
this is the task force headquarters of planet 4.
this is space battleship yamato!
after we received your sos signal, we.ll land at your base.
we sincerely welcome yamato to land here.
have the enemies retreated?
although we were attacked, but we can.t see our enemies now!
l know!
we.ll land now.
yes!
we.ll send the guiding machine immediately!
the damage is serious!
yes.
weeks ago.
task force commander
l.ve been waiting for long!
yamato will be a morale boast.
our enemies will come back for a 2nd and 3rd attack.
we need to take precautions.
thank you very much.
forgive me, but we wish to do some reparation works for yamato.
l understand, we.ll help as well.
dagon.s fleet never expected yamato.s appearance and gathered their armies at planet 1 of barnard star.
gamilon base.
what?
the armoured battleships couldn.t have lost to earth.s fleet!
commander gaidel, perhaps we thought too lowly of our opponent.
dagon, if general finds out about the failure, you.ll be executed!
find it!
yamato must be nearby.
find it and destroy it immediately!
lnform all members!
stop explorations now, other than
work unit, all others are allowed to land!
yahoo!
we.ve not landed for a long time!
l never expected that!
captain isn.t too bad after all!
what a wet blanket!
most people have escaped.
there should be 1 or 2 pubs around?
great, let.s take a look!
hahaha!
aren.t you landing?
yes, the reparation works are harder than expected.
alright, let me help.
l.m sorry!
this place is fun!
this is part of our investigation!
one more cup please.
me too!
are you alright?
you.ve drunk a lot!
lt.s ok, it.s ok!
bring 1 bottle over!
cheers!
no one said drinking is allowed!
oh?
ls it navigation commander?
don.t be so cold and heartless!
why not have a drink too?
know your limits!
what are you doing?
return to the battleship now!
we.ll listen to captain.s orders.
l won.t follow your order!
you scoundrel!
stop!
you scoundrel!
oh?
what are you doing to navigation commander?
let.s see if l.m your match!
you.re welcome!
bring it on!
hahaha, how is it?
oh?
lt.s my turn now!
be prepared!
hold on!
let me fight this match!
who are you?
listen up!
l.m the ex-transport ship gear commander!
l.m yamato.s goods carrier pilot!
if you don.t stop and reconcile, l.ll let you see what l mean.
shut up, don.t be a busybody!
scoundrel!
you actually hit me!
scoundrel!
stop!
ah!
you scoundrel!
why did you hit the peacemaker?
you scoundrel!
it bounced over!
you scoundrel!
beer!
hahaha!
shima, why didn.t you stop them?
if l could, l would have stopped them!
stop, everyone!
kodai!
just let it all out now!
let.s do it big!
hahaha!
lt.s a missile attack!
return to yamato!
ok!
prepare for a battle!
work unit and space flying tiger battleship members,
to help out in the canon room!
lnform all members!
until captain kodai, deputy shima and other members return, we.ve to fight till the end!
even lifestyle unit can attack the missiles!
hand it to me!
our enemy.s 2nd missile attack is coming!
30 degrees to the right of the ship!
control the angle of shooting!
fire!
correct the angle of shooting by 2.3 degrees!
correct by 2.3 degrees!
we won.t be destroyed by you!
dreaded yamato!
we won.t let you escape this time!
deputy!
captain!
l.ve sent every unit to cover us!
all missiles before the 3rd attack are destroyed!
captain, l.ll hand the commanding position to you!
yes.
did you help us?
yes!
lt.s the same principles as shooting down battleships!
well, you are talented!
let.s see our professional.s talents!
the 4th missile attack is coming near at 40 degrees to the left.
let.s see!
just die!
oh?
bulls. eye!
great!
of course, don.t look down on our professional!
hahaha!
missile attacks seem to stop!
weird, perhaps they.re tested their strength.
we.ve detected the source of missiles.
where?
from barnard star!
barnard star?
shima, isn.t barnard star the starting point of the exploration of planets?
yes.
so there are enemies there?
captain, yamato.s reparations are completed!
we can take off anytime!
alright, take off now!
everyone, armour yourselves!
yamato will set off to barnard star!
start automatic control!
yes, change to automatic control!
shima, our new cadets are talented!
the new cadets protected yamato!
yes.
yes?
just now when the new cadets were fooling around in the pub, you stood by me.
it would seem that l, the assistant captain has no stand.
l was saved because you were joking along with me.
kodai, you.re a model captain!
shima...
perhaps l had been unhappy about you being the captain.
shima, what are you talking about?
because of you, l could fulfill my role as a captain.
let.s work hard in unity from now on!
yes, put in our best!
yamato, you.ve fallen into the trap!
we.ll send it to president desslok as a gift!
galman empire fleet.s awaiting yamato.
yamato.s traveling towards barnard
star, the place with a huge trap.
from now till the end of all life, there.re 311 more days to go.
311 more days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
the last pioneer
__file_terminal__
space battleship yamato 3
goodbye earth.
space battleship yamato is departing
for the distant lscandar at the end of the universe.
embark on this journey with our destiny.
smile to the people who are waving.
we will definitely return.
to reach the distant lscandar... the faraway hope.
space battleship yamato
led by princess mariposa, yamato travelled towards planet guardiana using space shift.
secret of planet guardiana
oh?
that's planet guardiana.
no, that's planet guardiana's door.
door?
there's subspace in there.
it's that one!
that's the door to planet guardiana!
so that's the secret as to why no one can find planet guardiana?
l see, is that the door to planet guardiana?
we didn't know all along.
oh?
this is planet guardiana.
guardiana.
kodai, this planet's statistics are the same as earth's!
it's earth!
same as earth!
great!
it's earth!
same as earth!
it's earth!
finally found it!
princess.
princess, it's great that you're fine.
you too.
yes.
he's elder ossa-meyer from our planet.
princess mariposa was attacked by
bolar federation's fleet on her navigation trip.
we felt hopeless at first.
l thank you for bringing her back, please take a rest at guardiana.
guardiana palace.
captain!
ls it ryusuke?
ls this the planet many people were looking for?
the one that gathered many worshippers?
the technology here is more backward as compared to earth.
looks like there isn't much power.
yes.
captain, conquer this planet!
make it the 2nd earth!
it's sad that l'm thinking likewise.
but if we do so, we'll be no different from bolar federation and galman-gamilon.
but we have no other ways.
it's the end of earth and mankind.
captain!
so this is planet guardiana?
yes.
yamato led us here.
yes.
bolar federation fleet.
officer gosafus.
faster!
it's the entrance of planet guardiana!
it's so bored here.
ls that so?
showara!
yes?
oh?
shima, there're battleships above!
what?
showara, contact captain kodai!
yes!
l'm kodai, what's up?
desslok's fleet is here!
oh, desslok's signal is transmitting through!
sending now!
alright.
kodai!
desslok!
kodai, is that planet guardiana?
yes.
how do you know?
how can this planet have the most powerful military powers in space?
looks like it's just a rumour.
we were shocked too!
so bolar and l have mistaken?
seems like it.
bolar's finally here!
they seem to have entered subspace.
general desslok, it's bolar federation's carrier vessels.
what?
hahaha, attack and conquer planet guardiana in high speed!
the destroyers, start to attack!
sir, those are bolar federation's battle planes.
we'll cover you, please prepare to battle!
hamu, you'll help princess mariposa to hide!
kato, return to yamato, lead all cosmo tigers to attack!
render help to desslok's fleet!
everyone, come with me!
yes!
oh?
it's the ground attacking fleet!
shoot the laser cannons together!
fire!
oh?
stop!
sir, you...
why don't you start attacking?
danger!
guardiana has given up on battles.
how come?
you'll be killed!
it's alright.
what?
3 battleships!
8 aircraft carriers!
approaching!
bolar federation, take a look at
galman-gamilon's real powers!
prepare ultimate desslok bomb!
yes, prepare ultimate desslok bomb!
fire ultimate desslok bomb!
ah!
desslok's successful!
captain, desslok has defeated bolar federation!
alright, order cosmo tigers to return, deal with bolar federation's ground troops.
yes!
l'll let them know!
dreadful bolar federation!
alright, everything's fine now!
brace up!
how's the next one?
doctor, this way!
ok!
this is serious!
bring the medicine!
yes!
no!
l mean my medicine!
ls this the one?
yes!
captain, we've taken in all the casualties.
everything's ok here.
it had been tough on you.
mr kodai.
princess mariposa.
l thank you on behalf of guardiana.
it's nothing.
mr kodai, please come with me.
l've something to show you.
royal graveyard.
please take a look.
this is?
proton missiles!
hyperion bombs!
no, those are scientific weapons that our knowledge can't explain.
you have such powerful weapons, and you actually refuse to battle just now.
like l said, we've given up on battling.
this planet used these weapons to rule the milky way in the past.
many planets in space treated planet guardiana as a legend and
there're many worshippers who want to save them.
but, we've discovered that, using weapons to battle will not
bring peace and harmony.
from then on, all the weapons were buried in this royal valley.
but, if enemies attack and planet guardiana is destroyed, wouldn't it be a waste?
even if we are exterminated, our thoughts will remain in the hearts of all in the milky way.
one day, a 2nd and 3rd planet guardiana will appear.
then, space would have peace finally.
l understand.
but, it's very difficult for the present us.
l believe no one can do it immediately.
it'd be good to work hard for that moment to come.
but, earth and mankind can't wait any longer.
princess mariposa has told me.
that's why l brought you here.
l'll give you the...
hydrocosmogen cannon... which can control the sun.
oh?
this is the one.
hydrocosmogen cannon
this is the one?
oh?
this will definitely control your sun.
thank you so much.
l'll have to bid farewell to you.
oh?
mr hamu.
mariposa.
princess mariposa.
sir, we've got to part.
princess mariposa.
l wish to live my life like this, but l can't.
l'm the daughter of the guardiana royal house.
l have to live in everybody's heart.
goodbye.
mariposa.
princess mariposa!
mother, guardiana.
princess mariposa lives in the heart of everyone in the form of mother, guardiana.
everyone's heart?
guardiana is really like that?
how?
are we attacking yamato after it leaves?
no, l'm the honourable...
desslok of galman-gamilon.
l won't attack an unprepared opponent.
ls it?
kodai!
l wish you success in controlling the sun!
thank you!
farewell!
kodai!
the hydrocosmogen cannon is fixed already.
alright, yamato, set off towards earth!
yamato, set off!
farewell, mariposa guardiana.
princess mariposa.
yamato has obtained the
hydrocosmogen cannon to control the sun.
can yamato be in time to control it?
from now till the end of mankind, there're 46 more days.
46 days to the end of mankind.
next episode:
yamato, shoot that sun!
__file_terminal__
amanonce said, "when you make a friend, you take on a responsibility.
that describes my friend, danny barrett.
when he invited me to lunch
i should have known there'd be strings attached.
excuse me, guys.
sorry.
sure.
go ahead.
macgyver, you're just in time.
for what?
you said lunch.
later, okay?
you know what's going on in here?
a jewellery safe cracked like an egg.
another few million in stones are gone, goodbye, you know?
same mo as heists in dallas, new orleans, chicago.
who's getting hit in the pocket book?
my client, pacific metropolitan.
but i know who's pulling the heists.
i've been tracing this guy halfway across the country.
he leaves town after.
no strain, no pain.
nobody hot on his tail, and know why?
because the thief is a diplomat.
yeah.
the ganubian cultural attaché.
i'll bet a porsche the diamonds are in the consulate.
danny!
what?
you're an insurance investigator.
this is heavy.
have you talked to the police?
sure, and wave bye to my porsche.
which i'll buy with the bonus i get when i get proof.
which is why i asked you here.
how'd i get so lucky?
you taught me everything i know about computer hacking.
what's computer hacking got to do with diamonds?
i figured the consulate computer had files on this cultural attaché.
i figured out a way into it.
i don't think that's a good idea.
it's kinda dumb.
no, it was brilliant.
when i accessed the menu and punched up the attaché's name, the thing lit up.
diamonds, dates of shipments.
wait a minute.
some thief put all that information into a computer?
arrogance.
to him it was just good record keeping, you know?
who's gonna touch him?
he's a diplomat.
all right, look.
what exactly was in the computer?
i got a quick look, then i got shut out.
that's an intercept program.
they're probably on you.
no way.
i need your help to hack my way back into the computer.
my computer is set up to receive the information.
i have the code word that gets me into his program: blue ice.
danny!
no!
blue ice.
our senior year, class voted danny the most reckless and the most irresponsible, but everybody loved him.
i'm gonna nail them, pete.
the diamond thief did this.
you know it, i know it, and i'm gonna nail him.
macgyver, wait a minute.
walk away from this for a couple of days.
let the police handle it.
that truck didn't have license plates on it.
the police are calling it a hit and run.
help me on this, pete.
well, i can't say no, can i?
where do we start?
the name of the ganubian cultural attaché.
his name is amir sumal.
he has quite a reputation for his brutal way of doing things, both in politics and his personal life.
a dangerous man.
he's hosting a reception for the city's wealthiest art patrons, but access is a tough nut to crack.
nobody gets in without an invitation.
step inside.
invitation, please.
step inside.
invitation, please.
step inside.
oh, my darling!
i haven't seen you since cannes, or mallorca?
oh, yes, i think it was mallorca.
how silly of me.
you will save me a dance, won't you?
pete had learned that sumal's office was located upstairs.
the computer had to be there.
sumal was at the party, so what i needed was a way upstairs.
amir sumal!
excuse me.
what a pleasure, i've been looking forward to meeting you.
thank you for coming.
i meant to ask you.
your magnificent necklace, is it an heirloom?
i'm sorry, staff only.
easy, easy.
take it easy, i want to make a deal with you.
if you don't scream, i don't scream.
how about that?
okay?
can i trust you?
all right, i want you to turn around, very, very slowly.
all right!
who are you?
it'll come to me.
what have you got in your bag?
just this.
now, who are you?
do we really need the gun?
just answer the question.
i'm impatient.
all right.
you want the truth?
i'm somebody who shouldn't be here.
like you, i bet.
what are you doing here?
oh.
hello.
obviously we were looking for a little privacy.
yes.
my fiancée here, she's a little old-fashioned about public displays of affection.
aren't you, dear?
move from behind the desk.
and lift your hands in the air.
this is embarrassing.
croce here.
i need some backup in the library.
oh, now, really.
please.
mr sumal would be outraged to see how you were treating guests.
move!
wait.
look, we're not really guests.
we're actually working undercover.
in fact, her gun is right over there.
where'd you learn that?
sunday school.
oh.
what are you doing?
finishing up what i started to do.
croce?
outside.
croce, are you in there?
if you think you can rappel in that outfit.
what's she doing?
that chick is a real banana boat.
pulls up in a ferrari, leaves in a wagon?
i hate when she does that.
it's all right, we made a trade.
i'll take care of it.
well, isn't this interesting how we run into each other twice in one day.
let me guess, you're an insurance investigator.
what else?
danny sure could pick 'em.
i'll take that as a compliment.
i thought you might have modem'd that.
yeah, but it's all scrambled.
i know this is a multi-syllabic binary code, and that the ganubians use it all the time.
fact is, i have a decoding programmer disk in my car.
why don't you get it, and we can unscramble this mess together.
i believe you have my keys.
allow me.
be right back.
put your hands on the car.
let's go, you know the routine.
what's going on?
you're under arrest for grand theft auto.
grand theft?
hold it.
let me explain this.
keep your hands on the car and do what you're told.
i've got identification.
this is not a stolen car.
oh, this is your car?
well, no, not exactly.
well, no.
save it, lowlife.
the owner called it in, described you to a tee.
the owner?
that's what i said.
so, would you like to try a new story?
i love a good story.
you have the right to remain silent.
if you give up the right, anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law.
you have the right to speak with an attorney...
wow.
diamond grades.
yes, yes, yes.
so you're macgyver?
yeah.
how'd you know?
oh, the police told me.
i wanna compliment you on that little story you told about the decoder disk.
nice touch.
good moves.
you're not still mad about the car?
oh, i don't know.
i had to drag one of my best friends downtown to bail me out and then had to explain the whole thing.
of course i'm ticked.
look, we kept bumping into each other, and, well, sicing the cops on you was the fastest thing i could think of to get you off my tail.
i'm sorry about the car.
i came here to apologize.
you came here because you can't break the code.
you did?
maybe.
you're gonna have to come up with more than a lame apology.
danny was my brother.
you're the one that grew up with his father in georgetown.
raised there, married there, divorced there.
that was another lifetime ago.
why didn't you just say something to me?
i had no idea who you were,
i thought you were another one of danny's flaky friends.
look, i came here to find out who killed him.
and i figured i was better off working solo.
you a cop?
no.
but i...
i've had that kind of training.
danny did mention that his sister had gone to a law school, and worked for a senate subcommittee in washington.
why'd you leave?
well, my heart wasn't in it anymore.
so i figured i'd come back here and see danny.
he was all i had.
i tried to tell him he was in way over his head.
but he had his heart set on breaking this case.
he wanted to be important.
danny was important.
look...
i know some things, you know some things.
what do you say we put them together and show mr sumal he can't get away with murder?
i think i'd like that.
i think i'd like it a lot.
i don't know what you mean.
this is not proof.
what is this?
it's a list of the diamonds sumal stole.
valuations, descriptions...
they're in that consulate.
they haven't been shipped yet.
they're sitting there, ten million dollars worth.
we can't get a search warrant, it's foreign soil.
let's at least agree on our dilemma, all right?
amir sumal could commit murder.
he could kill a nun in central park at high noon, and we couldn't touch him.
that's what diplomatic immunity means.
the man is subject to the laws of his own land, not ours.
most we could do is ship him home.
but, in order to do that, we would have to catch this man with the stolen diamonds, right in the palm of his hand.
then let's do it.
but how?
well, first we're gonna need some diamonds for him to steal.
well, i have a diamond stick pin i inherited.
probably worth $600.
where are we going to get diamonds that he would want to steal?
how about the code room at the consulate?
you wanna steal the diamonds sumal has stolen
so that he can steal them back?
right.
from what we've been dug up, this sumal is an extremely arrogant guy.
he'd be a cinch to set up.
it could work.
he loves women, playing squash, and diamonds.
pick the order, those are his passions.
great, but how are those passions going to get us into a secure code room in a foreign consulate?
wait a minute.
diamonds, women, squash.
squash.
he's got to carry the key with him, right?
so if i could get into his locker at the racquet club...
i could make a mould, to make a copy of our own key.
of course we're gonna need some bait.
what kind of bait?
a diamond.
a very big diamond.
i'll be happy to double this if you'd tell mr sumal he's at my regular table, and please ask him to move.
excuse me, sir, but i'm afraid you are sitting at a reserved table.
this is the lady's regular table.
i beg your pardon?
i'm sorry to trouble you to move.
i will have a table cleared and set up for you in a moment, mr sumal.
my usual.
thank you.
i hope you don't think i'm being rude.
no.
just territorial.
oh, this is ridiculous.
won't you please join me?
come, sit down.
amir sumal.
nicole.
nicole de merlier.
de merlier?
but of course.
i know the name.
oh?
everyone knows of the merlier diamonds.
the famous twelve sisters.
it's a shame we must part with them.
you're selling the sisters?
why?
oh, the usual.
money.
my brother has inherited the sins of our late father:
expensive tastes for wine and women.
your brother is a well-known sportsman.
yes, actually, when he's not busy entertaining.
he lives for squash.
ridiculous game, though, chasing that silly ball.
it happens to be my favourite sport.
oh, no, not really?
yes.
i suppose i'm prejudiced.
i'd like to change your mind.
this afternoon.
i'm sorry.
i have an appointment.
perhaps we can organize this another time?
i have this wonderful idea.
i will accompany you to your appointment, and then we'll lunch at my club.
i'd like that.
and where is your appointment?
the diamond exchange.
yes?
right.
that's them.
places.
come on, move it.
let's go.
mr blane, please forgive my being late.
no problem.
well, it's about time.
let's not make this more difficult.
mr blane, may i please introduce you to a friend of mine, amir sumal.
how do you do?
my brother claude.
the rogue of the family.
i'm here, aren't i?
how you doing?
hello.
i was telling your brother we've spoken to our best contacts about your collection, including the vanderzeals, and there is considerable interest.
so, may i see the stone?
oh, yes, of course.
oh, wonderful.
such fire.
no noticeable flaws and approximately 1 0.3 karats.
the ninth sister of 1 2.
we'll deposit this in the vault, and we'll wire a check to your bank.
this is unbreakable glass, of course.
it means that our secure viewing room and the vault are visible at all times.
simpson?
our ultimate security precaution.
they're gorgeous.
may i take a closer look?
well, that's a little bit unusual, but since it's you, miss de merlier, please.
thank you.
this shipment is going to tiffany's.
and these are consigned to the winwood gallery.
we got a good price, nikki.
have my share transferred to the melbourne account.
i'll be at a tournament there.
squash?
it's his obsession.
distraction, my dear.
merely a distraction.
do you play, mr sumal?
in fact, i just invited your sister to lunch at my club.
oh, how nice.
how about if i invite myself along?
maybe have a couple of games before lunch.
claude!
i'll even buy, now that we have cash.
amir, do you mind?
delighted, my dear.
shall we?
shall we proceed to the game?
may i have a brief word with my brother before you destroy him?
family matters.
i'll see you there.
give me the key.
didn't get it.
what do you mean?
what do i mean?
i didn't get it.
i thought you were good.
so did i.
now what do we do?
locker number 1 2.
what's that mean?
it means, i play squash, and you play find the key.
not me, it's the men's locker room.
macgyver.
whatever happened to a good old-fashioned bar of soap?
do you mind if i borrow the soap?
oh.
not at all.
point, game and match.
i got to admit, you sure know how to make a good impression.
this key's gonna work out fine.
you did a fair job.
i got myself invited to the ambassador's reception.
now i would hardly rate that a "fair job".
okay.
fair plus.
so, my plan?
actually, i've got a better idea.
your rolls-royce, amir's dumbwaiter.
nicole de merlier.
your excellency, i felt a small reception would be appropriate.
i can endure it, amir, but in future, please, let us tend to business.
amir, darling.
oh, miss de merlier,
i'd like you to meet ambassador vulnay.
miss nicole de merlier.
an honour, sir.
this is wonderful!
the impressionists have such style.
and this renoir...
nicole, you amaze me.
i cherish beautiful things.
especially valuable ones.
like this degas.
or a thoughtful man who sends his security people to see i arrive safely.
security?
i saw him keep an eye on you, or us, at the café, then at the diamond exchange.
he escorted me to your front gate.
security?
call up the gate camera on the gallery monitor.
i feel very safe with you.
of course you are, my dear.
shall we rejoin the party?
a sym-com variable combination lock.
the kind that requires each button to be punched only once.
no key was gonna open that.
but i had an idea.
if they used all six buttons, the chances of guessing the right combination was about 720 to one.
narrowing down the odds was a simple matter of bringing fingerprints to the surface.
three buttons had fingerprints.
that got the odds down to one in six.
then it was a matter of running through the six combinations until i got the right one.
math and science do prove useful.
out!
fortunately, the ambassador leaves tonight.
so we will have tomorrow to ourselves.
well, i think that sounds positively lovely.
amir, darling, come here.
goodbye.
and thank you for a perfectly splendid afternoon.
amir, you're wicked.
now, now, now, you don't want to keep the ambassador waiting.
somehow i just know we're going to become much closer.
in case you didn't know, my country executes spies,
mr keach, charles keach!
i'm not a spy, i'm a private investigator.
i didn't mean any offence to you or your country.
but i do take offence.
first you invade my personal life, and you seem to have a fascination for my friend miss de merlier.
first off, her name isn't de merlier.
it's carpenter.
secondly, i'd hide the family silver if i were you.
what?
your lady friend's a high-class thief.
in the past month she's pulled off two jobs.
cash and stones worth about three mil.
it's my guess you're being set up for a hit.
i don't believe this!
she greased the maitre d' at the cafe.
oh, that's classic!
got under your skin to get herself inside the consulate.
what did she do while here?
well, we talked, and we looked at the art collection.
she's an expert on anything worth money.
art, jewellery, rare coins.
the lady's got a lot of interests.
you are in greater peril than you think.
one of the degas is missing.
bingo!
okay.
all the gear's in the van.
pete's on his way to the consulate.
there's just one question.
will it work?
are you having a problem with my plan?
just one, it's not mine.
so, what's the problem.
where is it?
my purse.
aw, nikki, doggone it, you just couldn't leave it alone.
move.
i had a very interesting discussion with a mr charles keach.
knows you remarkably well.
and suspects that you're here planning something illegal.
and i can see clearly that you plan to rob the blane diamonds.
now you used the diamonds you sold them to gain entrance.
but how did you take these photos?
my purse doubles as a camera.
i would like to thank you for providing me with such an extensive plan.
wait a minute!
know how to pick a variable induction electronic lock?
know the guard schedule?
the alarm system?
huh?
it may take me time to study your plan, but i'm in no hurry.
blane diamonds are.
take off tomorrow.
early.
you're implying i couldn't manage this venture without you.
you catch on real quick.
partners.
help me.
please.
help me.
easy, lady.
i've got you.
oh, god.
call the police.
just hold on.
hold on.
wait!
let's do it.
a king's ransom.
i commend you both.
you're everything mr keach said you were.
i'd like to thank you for making this a very profitable partnership.
short-lived as it was.
i'll take that.
now move over there.
what are you doing?
taking my half and yours.
you would do the same.
turn around and face the wall.
i could shoot you, but that would be so vulgar.
it's so much more poetic to execute you in your own gas chamber.
cover your nose and mouth.
how is it that we knew he'd do something like that?
human nature.
let's go.
to the consulate.
well done, fred.
okay, charlie, let's hit the consulate.
your excellency?
mr blane...?
i'm not mr blane.
my name is peter thornton.
and you're not a diplomat.
you're a thief and a murderer.
what on earth...?
mr thornton came here to formally accuse you of serious crimes, amir.
i, on your behalf, have demanded proof.
and still do.
well, go ahead, search him.
start with the attaché case.
mr ambassador, this man is a thief.
that case is full of stolen diamonds.
search him.
enough!
your excellency, you cannot permit this.
i have diplomatic immunity.
truly.
there can be no search.
gentlemen, i have business to attend to.
will you excuse me, please?
this one's for danny.
arrest him!
i do like working with you people.
you can't prosecute me.
you can't even hold me.
security!
your excellency!
what does this mean?
your excellency!
justice!
american justice!
i claim american justice!
__file_terminal__
in a room in a bungalow in mpulungu, zambia, a man believed to be a murderer is undergoing ritual interrogation.
his interrogator, dressed in red, calls himself doctor baela - the healer.
0thers call him a witch doctor.
this ceremony - a disturbing combination of exorcism, magic show and histrionics - is my introduction to one of the more advanced ex-british colonies of africa.
dr baela has only recently arrived in town from zaire.
he's already caught a thief.
he's a big attraction.
he agrees to give me a private consultation - in public.
have i any evil spirits in me?
he says you have got a shadow.
you have got a shadow.
this shadow is an evil shadow.
i have an evil shadow?
it is a bad shadow.
what form does the shadow take?
he can see a shadow of a woman.
i don't know who she is.
what does she look like?
she is not tall.
she is fat, a bit.
i have a long journey ahead of me.
is this shadow dangerous for me?
with his mesmerising, high-pitched voice and lazy, bloodshot, unavoidable eyes,
dr baela is certainly charismatic.
but should i believe him?
you have a bad shadow.
you can be rich, but sometimes that thing can drive out all your wealth.
can drive out?
all your riches.
all my?
your money, wealth.
i see.
can drive out all my money.
just like stealing.
when he tells me i'm bewitched by an evil shadow, it hardly matters what i believe - everyone else believes him.
can he help me?
yes, he can help with medicine, but it won't be on the national health.
what is in the medicine?
the medicine is to wash in, not to drink.
i wash in the medicine?
yes.
half expecting him to produce a chicken, i'm relieved to be prescribed tree bark - one of his less menacing props.
it's to wash the evil spirits from your body.
i'm not sure how i'm going to wash with it.
maybe i should just clout the evil spirits.
thank you.
there is another side to life in mpulungu - the refreshingly un-spellbinding world of fish.
100 tons of lake tanganyika's finest is shipped south every month.
it's the direction we must go.
we've been trying to reach the tip of africa in time to catch the supply ship, agulhas, which makes the only yearly crossing to antarctica from cape town.
if we miss this connection, we fail to reach the pole.
i take the first fish lorry out of town.
i feel as weary now as at any time on the journey.
it could be the heat, the memory of dr baela, or the realisation of the distance we still have ahead of us.
even the news seems ominous - in the first democratic election for 18 years,
kenneth kaunda has been rejected by the people he's ruled since independence.
i tried to do my very best for zambia, its people and mankind as a whole.
if my very best did not completely meet the aspirations of all those i tried to serve, this was never out of lack of choice.
this is the nature of multiparty politics.
you win some and you lose some elections.
not everybody's as gloomy as me and kenneth kaunda.
for the supporters of frederick chiluba, the slogan has worked - their hour has come.
it is our duty to build this vibrant zambia.
the hour...
the hour is ours.
unfortunately, they think that the coming of their hour is being witnessed by a bbc news crew.
it's too late to tell them these pictures won't be on for a year.
have a beer.
it's great.
congratulations.
thanks.
keep the hour going.
to the third republic.
is that right?
yeah.
takes me back.
i still don't really understand the politics.
200 miles south from mpulungu, my already confused system experiences violent culture shock.
this is shiwa - an english country estate in the heart of the zambian bush.
it's owned and run by john harvey and his wife, lorna.
they've agreed to put us up.
i'm not sure if i'm really here at all.
it's like a tired traveller's dream - everything you think you miss about britain.
the dream was here long ago.
it belonged to lorna's father, sir stewart gore-browne.
he came to this hilltop 80 years ago.
he now lies buried here.
0n his grave is the name the local people gave him
chipembele.
it means "rhinoceros".
a rhino charges and then stops, and he was just like that - evil-tempered man, and he would get very angry and five minutes later could be asking for a loan.
our children are like that.
here, he wanted to recreate the type of life that he'd known in england - a big house, a big estate, himself as the squire.
his paternalist ambitions were not only fulfilled, they still shape life at shiwa.
every sunday, the wives and children of the estate process to the gore-browne chapel.
there are always two services, one catholic, one protestant, according to which missionary got there first.
this is the catholic service and they're singing the "gloria".
sir stewart's military background still casts a long shadow over shiwa.
this is the muster ceremony.
every morning at seven o'clock, the estate workers are summoned for roll-call.
each man is then given his daily tasks.
the man who may inherit sir stewart's dream is john harvey's son, david.
he learnt farming in england.
conditions are tougher here.
as a precaution against ticks, shiwa's cattle must be put through the dip once every week.
there are 2,000 of them.
the process takes three days.
a 150% inflation rate is the last in a series of misfortunes that have beset the harveys.
they've always had to be ingenious, but the estate is littered with the ghosts of "good ideas at the time".
this was an essential-oils factory supplying perfumes to europe.
since then they've tried timber, eggs, chickens.
nothing lasted for long.
john won't give up.
his latest hope is a safari company.
if you look around zambia, you will find that people like david, my son, are staying here.
his two brothers are here.
there are lots of people of that age group - trained overseas, educated in england - who are coming back because they feel there is a life to be made here and that they can make enough money to live happily.
do you think you will retire or will you always be running shiwa?
well...
remember i told you that i was a soldier and there is a saying that old soldiers fade away.
they never die.
no, they never die!
i think that's going to happen to me.
every evening, the flag bearing the harvey coat of arms is lowered and dinner is taken in the traditional british style - but the talk is of africa.
i was taken to see a witch doctor in mpulungu who told me that i had an evil shadow and gave me something to get rid of it.
i thought at the time, "this is a joke, a fraud.
but ever since, especially as i didn't feel well the night afterwards,
i've thought, is there anything in it?
what do you think?
i think there is a darker side.
i know of an incident in chisamba, where we have another farm, of a farmer losing a motor, having a motor stolen, and he got very frustrated and ended up bringing in the witch doctor.
and he lined all his staff up and the witch doctor tapped each member of staff on the shoulders with a stick, and walked down this line.
eventually he came to a man and he tapped him on the shoulder and tore a strip of skin off him.
this man then duly broke down and cried and admitted he was involved with stealing the motor.
would you use a witch doctor?
i think i would.
that makes me feel awful.
since i left shiwa, another chapter has been written in its brave but blighted history.
john and lorna harvey were attacked and killed in southern zambia six months later.
at the nearest railhead we pick up a train with a family travelling with everything and the kitchen sink.
i'm glad to be back on trains where, however briefly, you do run the risk of meeting people.
there seemed to be your whole house going onto the train.
my son is moving to livingstone.
it's my son's household.
and what did he have?
bed, chairs and table.
has he taken everything?
everything.
no problem finding a seat in the dining car.
this is due to a complete lack of anything on which to dine.
everything except the tablecloth is off.
few borders are as emphatic as that between zambia and zimbabwe at the victoria falls.
the river zambezi, which marks the frontier, plunges 300 feet over cliffs a mile long.
the column of spray thrown up can be seen 20 miles away.
it drew livingstone here in 1855 - the first white man to set eyes on the falls.
at the bottom of the gorge, the river is flung about in a series of tortuous rapids.
there are people crazy enough to take boats over them and, what's more, people daft enough to pay them to do it.
i'll try to make it easy for you to know which side is going first onto the downstream side.
the way i'll do it is to call for that side which is going first onto the downstream side.
when i say, "crush forward", the first three go to crush and two go right up on top.
hang on.
this is the world of white-water rafting.
alex, our driver and guide, may look like superman but he's as tightly wrapped in a life jacket as the rest of us.
when i call "go", turn around and face onto the wave side.
you guys all set?
go!
come on back!
0ne of us has fallen overboard already.
this doesn't bode at all well.
you ready for some action?
we've just had some.
let's go rafting.
i have the extraordinary sensation that my stomach is several yards behind me.
for those interested in technicalities - nigel's camera is strapped to his shoulder and my microphone is waterproofed inside three condoms.
i'm still here.
you haven't got rid of me yet.
there's harder ones to come.
starting from rapid number four will be some real good white water.
big class-four rapid.
after that rapid, number five is a class-five rapid and then we're riding in some good class-four and five white water.
what's the class system of rapids then?
what's the worst?
the highest class you can run in a raft is a class five.
so we're going for the highest?
we are.
it's one of the biggest white waters you can get in the whole world.
so we're doing some real white-water rafting.
there's hardly time for fear, though at this point i distinctly remember something i want to change in my will.
the joy of survival is tempered by the knowledge that there's worse to come.
the final irony is that in sheer exhilaration at surviving nine rapids,
i swim for shore, hit a rock, and crack a rib.
next day, i make my way painfully slowly across the zambezi bridge, trying to ignore any connection between witch doctors and rafting.
but if i think i did something silly yesterday, watch this.
a man throws himself into the 300-foot gorge... and back again.
for fun.
this is the sport of bungee jumping.
it makes white-water rafting look like a day at the paddling pool.
and it's so popular that people are actually queuing to jump off.
five, four, three, two, one...
bungee!
if something about the zambezi gorge attracts loonies, then something about zambia has attracted misfortune.
apart from my rib, i've had a suitcase stolen and one of our crew has had malaria.
last night i finally tried dr baela's medicine.
perhaps it was a bit late.
anyway, the end of the bridge marks somewhere new
zimbabwe.
at first zimbabwe looks old-fashioned but, compared to zambia, it's a land of progress.
blessed with huge coal reserves, they've kept a lot of steam engines - and not just for nostalgia.
but bulawayo station does take me back a few years to those days before white-water rafting when climbing on the footplate at sheffield midland was the ultimate excitement.
with a cracked rib, it's the ultimate test of the unreformed trainspotter.
how old is this locomotive?
i think it's about 30 years old.
how old are you?
i'm 34.
about the same age.
almost the same.
why did you become an engine driver?
i've always liked trains.
i used to like trains when i was young.
the railways of southern africa were once described as "the sinews of empire".
the man who built them was cecil john rhodes.
his mixture of megalomania and foresight opened up the continent and created a country in his name
rhodesia.
this train proves he put his money where his mouth was.
a hundred years ago it was all the rage to have your own railway coach, and as rhodes owned a large chunk of africa, he was not to be left out.
this one was made for him by pullman in 1895 and has everything your african commuter could want.
a complete kitchen range and many other delights besides.
his own bathroom complete with enamel bath.
bedroom - mahogany panelled.
and his reception room where he could entertain other people who'd made spectacular amounts of money from carving up africa.
this was also the coach in which he made his last journey.
at the age of 49 in 1902 he was brought from cape town, where he died, to the place where he had requested to be buried, just outside bulawayo.
in his will he wrote, "i admire the grandeur of the matapos mountains in rhodesia.
therefore i desire to be buried on the hill which i called 'the view of the world'
in a square to be cut in the rock, covered by a brass plate with these words thereon.
here lie the remains of cecil john rhodes.
here, despite threats by zimbabwe's rulers to dig him up and send him back,
cecil rhodes, the empire builder, still lies.
rhodesia disappeared a decade ago after a violent guerrilla war, but the country feels as english as anywhere i've been.
bulawayo's streets and parks are evidence of that most european concept - civic pride.
the trauma of independence has had little effect on the bbc - the bulawayo bowling club.
membership has dwindled from 400 to 120, but there are still five greens and pearle sheppard, the club secretary, is bullish.
our youngest member is a boy of about 14.
goes to boarding school, so he just plays at school holidays.
our oldest member is that lady you saw on the green.
she's 86.
so you get a very representative crowd - people from all walks of life and all ages all come and play bowls.
do you have any black african players?
we don't, no.
the africans are not particularly interested in bowls.
all the clubs are open, of course.
the only black bowlers in bulawayo belong to the blind bowlers association.
they have been brought into the game through the association that helps blind people, and they encourage them to play bowls.
it's fantastic to see some of them play because they might not be able to see, yet they sometimes play incredible bowls.
0ne place no member of the bbc would be seen is the gloriously named umshitshimbo beer garden.
# young boy dances, left in a dusty township... #
the umshitshimbo garden is a concrete patch behind a downtown hotel, but it's one of the most popular places in bulawayo to drink and jive.
the music scene is thriving.
bands like southern freeway - fronted by a south african, steve dyer - pack the place.
there's low life and high life at the umshitshimbo.
shots of gin top up the lager, and when the band stops, there are long announcements on the dangers of aids.
no one listens.
still, it's the happiest memory i take away from bulawayo.
200 miles south, we reach our last country in africa - our springboard to antarctica and the south pole.
0n the banks of the limpopo, miles of razor wire guard the republic of south africa from the rest of the world.
life changes completely.
despite years of sanctions and universal ostracism, western luxury starts here.
where else in africa could you rent a white bmw?
country number 14 is undergoing as profound a change as any we've passed through.
four months before we arrived, apartheid was officially abolished.
no one quite knows where south africa goes next.
in the shadow of slag heaps is johannesburg - the biggest city we've seen since cairo.
unlike cairo, johannesburg is cool, calm and corporate.
retrieving the gold on which their wealth is built leads to spectacular engineering.
we're travelling at 70 metres a second.
70 metres a second.
two kilometres down.
this is western deep levels mine.
it's in the "guinness book of records" for the deepest penetration of man into the earth.
two and a half miles.
7,000 men work down here.
they're drawn from so many different tribes that a mining language has developed.
fanakalo is the esperanto of the mines.
it's taught in the world's deepest classroom.
yenalo... sar-har.
ini-lo.
yenalo... sar-har.
yenalo... spa-ne-rer.
yenalo spa-ne-rer.
mosheh.
ini-lo?
yenalo spa-ne-r.
spa-ne-rer.
ini-lo?
yenalo spa-ne-rer.
mosheh.
spa-ne-rer.
armed with the word for "spanner", we leave the air-conditioned tunnels for where mining gets painful.
bit dangerous here.
where's the water from?
this is from where they're drilling.
it's drilling water.
we're walking up the strike gully towards the strike itself.
we'll be going up a ladderway.
sure.
it's quite hot now, isn't it?
yeah.
hot and wet.
it's 30 degrees centigrade.
crouched in a chamber four foot high, a team has been drilling for six hours.
0ne man operates the drill, one checks the equipment, one directs cooling water.
an engineer directs operations into an inch-wide gold-bearing seam.
he's the only white man.
it takes nearly four hours to change shifts.
the technicians are gathering at the crucible.
it's a very select band that witnesses the final act of the drama.
is the gold coming through?
if you look there, you'll see the gold is now a greeny-silvery colour.
it's changing, yeah.
you see it coming through the top.
that's how you know where the gold is coming out.
so how much gold is there in this particular smelting?
in this one we're probably getting about three bars of gold - that's about 80 kilograms.
why do you have feather dusters in here?
it's a very industrial environment and there are feather dusters.
what are they for?
all the dust in the smelt house could contain gold, so every spot of dust is collected and put into the furnace.
nothing is taken out.
even overalls are put into the furnace sometimes.
i won't get an internal check?
no.
in johannesburg, i'm made aware of how long i've been away.
we left in high summer.
now it's less than a month to the festive season.
# snow had fallen snow on snow
# snow on snow
# in the bleak midwinter long ago #
there's nothing like christmas to provoke homesickness.
but if all goes well, i could get home from the south pole in time to start shopping.
but africa has one last and particularly nasty trick in store for us.
back at the hotel, a message is waiting.
though it isn't from my witch doctor, it might as well be.
i can't quite believe the news and double-check with our production office in london.
hello.
mimi?
yeah.
it's michael.
i've just got your fax.
yeah.
i can't believe it.
is that?
about the agulhas.
they have no berths at all?
the agulhas is sailing to antarctica, but all places on board have been taken.
there is no room for us.
while our london office tries every alternative, we can only hope and wait.
we decide to spend the day at soweto.
it has a latin motto.
conjuncte agamus" - "let's pull together".
the place is full of surprises.
this house, i'm told, boasts the ultimate in status symbols - a white security guard.
jimmy, my guide, lives round here.
he's a man of sharp wit and little sentiment.
he tells me that in soweto, bmwstill means "break my windows".
jimmy, to all intents and purposes, this looks like the beverly hills of soweto.
what sort of people live here?
it's the affluent black people.
professional people, businessmen, doctors, lawyers...
successful people, hard workers.
these are the people who work for the bank, not in the bank.
if you make a lot of money in soweto, do people tend to stay here or want to move?
there's a feeling of people moving.
i've been seeing signs - "for sale" - because the group areas act is over, so it's a question now of economic apartheid.
those who have the money can move with the joneses.
why do they move from soweto?
it's a feeling of... people tend to look for what they couldn't be given.
what you were prohibited from doing is exactly what you want to do.
now it's open, people feel it's much nicer in the city, in the suburbs.
convenient.
five minutes drive from wherever to the city or buses and transportation.
transportation is a way to make money in soweto.
so serious is the violence on railways that sowetans prefer to fight for a place on a private minibus.
there are currently 145,000 of them, and the numbers are rising.
simply because there's more people...
soweto was set up in 1933 to house a cheap labour force.
shanty settlements like this one are the legacy of that decision.
these are the families of people who are not wanted and probably never will be.
if you leave your family, you could try one of the hostels.
jimmy doesn't recommend it.
how can you have 16 men in one room?
16 smells of food - this one cooking that, this one doing this.
sometimes people want to rest - you've been working at night, others during the day.
men in general put together.
these are the barbers.
street barbers.
money making, of course.
it's connected electrically from the battery.
that's how they get the electricity to do all this.
that's just someone doing a bit of work?
yeah.
just a bit of work.
how much do they pay for this?
12 to 15 rand per bed.
different hostels have different prices.
for a month. £3 a month.
what are they earning?
are these the lowest wage earners?
most people in the hostel are low wage earners, but you get a few earning more.
roughly 500 rand a month, depending where they're working.
500 would be worth about £100 a month.
there'd be people here with £100 a month?
yeah.
it's much nicer inside than it is out.
you can't imagine living eight in one.
it's like dormitory style.
if you spend all your life here, this is pretty bad.
before i leave, i have some visiting to do.
it's a sign of the times that the gwangwa family - neighbours of ours in london - have because of their anc membership only just been allowed back into their country.
six months ago, this visit would never have been possible.
wrong day.
there's michael, there's michael, there's michael.
hey!
there you are!
hello!
how great to see you.
that's wonderful.
keeto.
hello.
and my my-lucy?
where's my-lucy?
somewhere else.
that's right.
oh, look at that.
welcome, michael, to the gwangwa family.
you do that for everybody!
no!
this is...
they use... cow dung.
cow dung, is it?
that's the decorations that they do.
fresh cow dung.
we couldn't get the cow dung in london!
kicking our heels for another day, we join a football crowd.
sport is multiracial in south africa now, but rugby remains the white game and soccer the black game.
today's match is a cup semi-final.
sundowns of pretoria are taking on cosmos of johannesburg.
oh, what a shot!
it was a very good shot.
we leave johannesburg with nothing decided - but we leave in style.
this is the blue train, which runs expensively between pretoria and cape town.
i justify it as a reward for all our rough-riding through africa.
the nile valley express in sudan carried 4,000 people.
the blue train's carrying just 92 and no one's allowed on the roof.
the contrast with everything that's gone before is almost unnerving.
what does one do with nine pieces of cutlery?
the answer is you order a bottle of south african chardonnay and stop feeling guilty.
after all, how many people here have cracked ribs and evil shadows?
no one ever gets on, no one ever gets off.
in this air-conditioned double-glazed luxury, i feel like an overfed goldfish - able to observe the world from my bowl whilst remaining completely detached from it.
it could quite easily drive you mad.
the last 900 miles of africa run across the high veld and the wide, dry plain they call the karoo to approach the cape in a scenic display of mountains, valleys and vineyards.
7,000 miles, and nearly three months after entering port said, the unmistakable shape of table mountain marks the end of africa.
i think africa's changed me.
until mpulungu i was an incurable optimist, but something went wrong there and i've reached cape town as an incurable fatalist - what will be, will be.
from the top of table mountain, you can see where the indian and atlantic 0ceans meet.
beyond that, 2,500 miles over the horizon, is antarctica.
but the most poignant sight of all is the red-hulled supply ship we've chased through africa to reach.
we made it, but our appeal for space on board the agulhas has failed.
when she sails tomorrow on the only voyage of the year to the antarctic, we'll still be here.
the journey, it seems, is over.
__file_terminal__
we're breaking up.
it's not working out between us.
we're breaking up.
not here, not in front of the kids.
we're breaking up.
i could tell.
i'm a doctor.
you know we're breaking up, right?
oh, yeah.
i have to break up with both of you.
what?
you know we're breaking up, right?
oh, yeah.
it's not working for me.
it's over.
again?
it's over.
again?
okay, don't be so dramatic.
we're breaking up.
we're break...
okay.
i'm sorry, i've forgotten your name.
we're breaking up.
i can't hear you.
i know that you can hear me because i can hear you.
we're breaking up.
okay.
it's over.
e-mail me.
i might forget.
things haven't been working out with us...
i'm breaking up with you.
beat you to it.
boom!
we're breaking up.
what?
can't it wait 20 seconds?
ten seconds.
i gotta go.
aah!
wait.
attention, staff.
there is a gigantic snake living below the elevators.
love.
why is it that when you're in it, you can't remember not being in it.
and when you're not in it, it's like, "what is it?
why is it not just in and of itself, in or out?
i should do my own podcast.
this looks like esperanza the maid.
well, it's like a big maid and a little maid.
i don't like chocolate people.
oh, don't say that in public, honey.
hey.
dr. black, you spend a lot of time treating nicky but his advanced-aging disease seems to be getting worse.
i have gout.
why don't you go down to the cafeteria and get an eight-pack of smirnoff ice?
can you get on with the exam before nicky gets any older?
god, look at those eyes.
i have heat vision.
god, i just wish i knew you when you were young.
he's 6.
then i wish i knew you when you were 4.
here's a question.
what?
are space bugs real?
do you like new experiences?
what are you doing?
it's cold in here.
it's fine.
no, it's not.
what's going on here?
that's cat's new boyfriend.
she just broke up with me.
a month ago.
she just tried kissing you two weeks ago.
well, she'll date anything.
no offense to me.
none taken.
remember when she dated josh brolin?
remember when she dated brolin's character in goonies?
remember when she dated that sculpture of our hospital's founder, mr. childrens?
in goonies.
no, he wasn't in goonies.
he wasn't in goonies?
no.
oh, you know who i'm thinking of?
josh brolin.
heh.
she'll date anything.
what does that make us?
the two hottest doctors in here?
you are so true.
i feel dizzy.
i wanna get deep inside of you.
congratulations, dr. von sydow.
you are the first doctor from childrens ever to receive the nobel prize.
just for medicine.
they offered the peace prize, but i turned it down.
i don't want bitches to think i'm a gaylord.
well, max, i'm, heh, very busy, so...
right.
i'm audi rs4 with the gold package.
ms, right?
excuse me?
you have ms?
a touch.
probably a little parkinson's too, right?
little bit.
how much cerebral palsy do you have?
i have a splash.
it's going around, why?
are you sitting down?
i can cure you.
you know i can't fix your handicapped emotions, right?
__file_terminal__
previously on childrens hospital:
and so it is my great pleasure and honor to open up childrens hospital's very own genital ward.
okay, i just gotta get my head wrapped around this.
so you're saying there is a law that says we cannot test new drugs on rare pandas?
that's what i am saying.
really?
mm-hm.
aah!
can i ask you another question?
is there a law against jerking off in a government office cubicle?
this genital ward will put childrens hospital on the forefront of modern genital technology and genital research.
are you sitting down?
i can cure you.
you know that visiting doctor?
the neuro specialist?
dr. max von sydow?
yeah, i heard he won a nobel peace prize.
funny, he doesn't look like a fag.
he says he can cure me.
what?
hold on, chief.
if he does that, you might lose your sexy strut.
strut?
maybe but i have no feeling in my pelvis.
i'll feel that shit for you.
you're sweet.
but i wanna be normal, owen.
i wanna be like everyone else.
oh.
that's a kick in the nuts to all those girls that were never called special or crippled or handi-crippled.
i bet you say that to all the girls.
no, i don't.
i guess you wouldn't.
i don't know other handicapped people.
right.
ah.
chief, you have a gift.
please don't ruin it.
now, how about that handjob?
dora?
hi.
sorry to wake you.
i wanted alone time while your mom was at her aa meeting.
can you look under the bed for dracula?
oh, yeah.
i'm gonna look under everything.
i gotta go peep.
can't you wait five minutes?
i can count to a hundred.
okay.
one, two, three...
oh, yeah.
cup the balls.
hey.
i'm challenging you to a healing power of laughter-off.
you have one week to perform an operation using only the healing power of laughter.
if you fail, you hang up your balloony pants forever.
i won't fail.
well, i won't.
fine!
jesus.
if i fail, i leave medicine all together.
no, you go fuck yourself.
attention staff:
i am speaking on the pa system.
that's what i'm doing right now.
in a clear and authoritative voice.
that's it.
this kid's getting a vasectomy.
no, don't.
diego?
my mom says that israel's an outdated concept.
__file_terminal__
you can't be sleeping with this patient.
he's only 6.
he has advanced aging disease.
it's just not right.
i was kidding.
ha-ha-ha!
oh, my god.
seriously, you kids have fun.
ha-ha-ha.
that's it.
this kid's getting a vasectomy.
no, don't.
excuse me.
no, i didn't fart.
i just have to get by.
there aren't stairs there.
damn it.
nut-cutters.
do you mean the scalpel?
i'm not going to give it to you.
call it by its right name.
fine.
scalpel.
thank you for the nut-cutters.
dr. richie, it look's like you're giving this 6-year-old boy a vasectomy.
well i'm not.
sperm-tube slicer?
oh, no.
i can't be party to this.
fine, i'll do it myself.
where do i put this shit?
hey, lola.
can i talk to you for a second?
make it quick.
i took an ambien and it's about to kick in.
i know you don't really have a tumor, okay?
i know you were just claiming you did in order to break up with owen.
thank god that someone gets it.
blake, thank you.
i wanna operate on your nonexistent tumor.
oh, god.
no, hear me out.
i challenged the new clown doctor to a healing-power-of-laughter-off.
now, if i operate on your fake tumor, i'm bound to win.
no.
it's stupid.
ugh.
whoo, whoo.
ambien.
it's kicking in.
what?
oh.
uh...
attention, staff.
the heavyweight champion of the world, rocky balboa.
what?
you wanna go to the o.r.?
okay, i'll take you.
webster's dictionary defines love as "a roof lantern or turret often with slatted apertures for escape or smoke or admission of light in a medieval building.
god, what's wrong?
this is all your fault.
your exboyfriend just gave my 6-year-old son, nicky, a vasectomy.
josh brolin gave your son a vasectomy?
no, dr. richie.
that makes more sense.
josh isn't licensed to practice.
dr. black.
that i know.
dr. black!
okay!
god.
the answer to your question is yes.
i dated josh brolin.
ugh, don't be dramatic.
i'm not.
i've been sick lately, mainly in the mornings in between really weird food cravings, ever since i had sex with your son.
sex with my son?
what, you prefer i have sex near your son?
i don't see what the big deal is, me having sex with your son.
it's not about the preposition.
oh, no.
ever since i had sex with your son, i haven't been feeling right.
i hope i'm not sick with something your son gave me.
no, it's true, though.
zach braff has a tiny penis.
a colored hooker told me.
yeah.
what?
wow.
isn't it about time we operated on your neurological and muscular disorders?
right.
oh.
hey, you guys, i think you should know, i've decided to let dr. von sydow cure me.
of what?
wish me luck.
blake will be in charge while i'm recovering.
hey, wait a minute, where is blake?
hey.
blake is operating on lola's tumor using only the healing power of laughter.
two crazy operations at once?
let's go!
hurry, everybody.
hurry.
let's fucking go!
__file_terminal__
the first cases appeared in early summer.
2 00:00:55,740 -- 00:00:58,410 for months the virus tried to destroy the population.
a single hope for the survivors:
radio to the military base in noah
damn!
drive faster, shit?
but someone do something!
sonia!
we have to stop, shit!
that's impossible, continue!
to get where?
, to hell?
come!
leave the area!
please help!
we are all dead now!
we have to escape.
it is difficult.
the vital organs are not affected.
show me his wounds!
stop the car.
what is it, sonia?
stop the ambulance!
i need to know ..!
what?
in the car ...
in the car!
mutants
sonia ...
do not touch anything.
clean up.
i have to rely on you.
you have to clean and disinfect.
now.
this base ...
noa is it false information?
27 00:06:23,680 -- 00:06:24,780 is it really there?
28 00:06:26,710 -- 00:06:28,270 they are hiding inside the bastards.
29 00:07:05,590 -- 00:07:07,960 if we are to continue, we must find a station.
30 00:07:18,470 -- 00:07:20,030 she has no emotions.
31 00:07:20,220 -- 00:07:22,190 if there is a small change, she will get rid of us.
32 00:07:26,010 -- 00:07:27,630 she is a military marko.
33 00:07:29,000 -- 00:07:30,190 we need her.
34 00:08:02,970 -- 00:08:03,760 it is loaded.
35 00:08:06,050 -- 00:08:07,320 do you know how to use?
36 00:08:15,870 -- 00:08:17,630 at least in an emergency leave.
okay?
37 00:08:22,990 -- 00:08:23,870 i'm not leaving without you.
nothing.
shoot!
40 00:11:04,200 -- 00:11:04,920 shoot, dammit!
41 00:11:07,300 -- 00:11:08,250 leave her alone!
42 00:11:14,310 -- 00:11:15,150 are you okay?
43 00:11:35,180 -- 00:11:36,280 what do you expect to do?
44 00:11:42,520 -- 00:11:43,470 ditch 45 00:11:46,780 -- 00:11:47,780 he comes with us.
46 00:11:49,350 -- 00:11:50,190 autistic 47 00:11:51,000 -- 00:11:52,300 he is scared, that is all.
48 00:11:53,240 -- 00:11:55,280 we'll take care of it, once we reach the base.
49 00:11:55,480 -- 00:11:56,480 are you sure?
50 00:11:58,770 -- 00:11:59,700 look, this crazy.
51 00:12:02,830 -- 00:12:03,840 i will not leave him 52 00:12:04,200 -- 00:12:06,200 sonia ...
infected or not - he is not coming.
53 00:12:07,840 -- 00:12:08,680 why cant he joint us?
i told you i trust you.
55 00:12:11,470 -- 00:12:13,550 really?
you manipulate us from the start.
56 00:12:13,980 -- 00:12:15,000 why do we follow you?
57 00:12:15,800 -- 00:12:17,280 both ...?
58 00:12:17,410 -- 00:12:18,530 you have to explain to us ..
59 00:12:20,430 -- 00:12:21,630 give me the keys!
60 00:12:21,620 -- 00:12:23,860 what do you think?
explain now, dammit!
61 00:12:24,230 -- 00:12:24,990 shut up!
62 00:12:25,870 -- 00:12:27,870 give me the fucking keys!
63 00:12:28,410 -- 00:12:29,020 i am not giving them back ..
64 00:12:29,880 -- 00:12:32,110 leave the gun ..
65 00:12:33,000 -- 00:12:36,550 turn around and back away three steps.
66 00:12:39,150 -- 00:12:39,680 no!
67 00:12:55,930 -- 00:12:56,370 no!
68 00:14:12,580 -- 00:14:15,350 framework will be ok, calm down, relax ...
calm down!
69 00:14:25,670 -- 00:14:26,400 mark, wake up!
stay with me, mark!
71 00:15:04,320 -- 00:15:05,390 i'll find another place.
72 00:16:10,700 -- 00:16:11,480 hello?
you have to leave, my love.
emergency call to the base in noah.
repeat: an emergency call to the base in noah.
75 00:21:56,000 -- 00:21:58,550 my name is sonia, er medical, dupri.
i call through the radio of my car.
77 00:22:02,260 -- 00:22:04,380 my companion was hit by a bullet.
78 00:22:06,440 -- 00:22:08,490 we sat in the middle forest in a large building.
79 00:22:10,830 -- 00:22:12,740 a helicopter flew over us 80 00:22:14,060 -- 00:22:17,550 we are demanding evacuation please evacuate .
81 00:22:18,300 -- 00:22:19,280 we are not contaminated.
82 00:22:22,160 -- 00:22:23,210 come to us.
83 00:22:23,700 -- 00:22:24,580 we are not contaminated .
84 00:22:25,290 -- 00:22:26,450 base noe, confirm.
85 00:22:29,610 -- 00:22:31,600 base noe, please confirm evacuation.
86 00:22:36.620 -- 00:22:39,060 hey ...
i do not recognize this voice, do not move..
87 00:22:41,580 -- 00:22:45,540 roger, now our position is confirmed 88 00:22:46.060 -- 00:22:49,540 - ... car ...
89 00:22:50,040 -- 00:22:51,100 base noah?
90 00:22:54,330 -- 00:22:54,850 damn!
91 00:22:55,600 -- 00:22:56,400 base noah?
92 00:23:05,460 -- 00:23:06,250 yes, by contacting them on the radio.
93 00:23:07,490 -- 00:23:08,780 they will come to us.
94 00:23:09,460 -- 00:23:12,730 how can you trust them?
never take any risks.
95 00:23:14,450 -- 00:23:15.870 after finishing
you all right, have any pain?
97 00:23:25,210 -- 00:23:26,720 some dizziness, is it bad?
98 00:23:27,720 -- 00:23:29,450 it hurts a little, but it's bearable.
99 00:23:32,050 -- 00:23:32,750 thanks.
100 00:23:40,760 -- 00:23:41.460 what is it?
101 00:23:44,140 -- 00:23:44,460 sonia ...
102 00:23:50,150 -- 00:23:51,550 the wound was serious.
103 00:23:52,010 -- 00:23:52,510 so?
104 00:23:54,210 -- 00:23:55,200 is it good news?
105 00:24:02,570 -- 00:24:05,610 i'm not doing anything.
106 00:24:06,360 -- 00:24:07,540 the virus does not spread well.
107 00:24:08,110 -- 00:24:08,790 come ...
108 00:24:09,260 -- 00:24:11,550 there were bandits, who will come after us.
109 00:24:11,570 -- 00:24:13,440 to report about our presence here.
110 00:25:08,630 -- 00:25:09,430 are you ok?
111 00:25:25,330 -- 00:25:25,860 marcus!
calm down!
113 00:26:05,100 -- 00:26:06,170 marcus!
calm down!
114 00:26:23,100 -- 00:26:23,750 everything will be fine.
115 00:26:28,220 -- 00:26:28,990 everything will be fine.
everything will be fine.
117 00:26:54,270 -- 00:26:55,150 i was not sure ...
118 00:26:57,850 -- 00:26:59,000 how long do i have?
119 00:26:59.600 -- 00:27:00,690 sonia?
120 00:27:05,370 -- 00:27:07,990 the virus probably is in a vegetative stage.
121 00:27:10,800 -- 00:27:11,870 how much?
122 00:27:20,540 -- 00:27:21,390 three days ...
123 00:27:23,900 -- 00:27:24,880 maybe less.
124 00:27:40,000 -- 00:27:41,830 the military probably will have to contact us.
125 00:27:43,620 -- 00:27:45,610 once we're there, we can take care of you.
126 00:27:46,000 -- 00:27:47.000 ok?
127 00:27:48,400 -- 00:27:49,400 you must be stegnesh 128 00:27:54,940 -- 00:27:58,190 do not leave me..
...to become one of his victims.
129 00:28:01,360 -- 00:28:02,090 i beg you ...
130 00:28:08,300 -- 00:28:09,690 you can not expect that from me 131 00:28:45,130 -- 00:28:46,010 hold on, mark.
132 00:28:48,450 -- 00:28:49,310 stop!
133 00:28:57,600 -- 00:28:58,300 mark, no.
134 00:28:59,490 -- 00:29:00,300 look ...
135 00:29:00,980 -- 00:29:02,300 mark, look!
136 00:29:04,010 -- 00:29:04,930 look at me!
137 00:29:10.540 -- 00:29:12,060 it was just before the quarantine.
138 00:29:12,160 -- 00:29:13,730 one of my patients 139 00:29:14,600 -- 00:29:15,990 just while i was tending him 140 00:29:18,740 -- 00:29:20,340 it's been two weeks now.
141 00:29:21,650 -- 00:29:22,820 i must be immune.
142 00:29:24,790 -- 00:29:25,970 there is hope, mark.
143 00:29:27,460 -- 00:29:30,200 without a scientist, we can not find an antidote.
give me that chance.
145 00:29:54,020 -- 00:29:54,910 i'm with you.
146 00:29:56,120 -- 00:29:57,450 i'll always be with you.
147 00:32:58,630 -- 00:32:59,780 i need morphine.
148 00:33:02,500 -- 00:33:05,310 i can not give you any..
i want morphine!
149 00:33:09,140 -- 00:33:10,880 look at me.
150 00:33:13.300 -- 00:33:14,940 do you want me to suffer?
151 00:33:20,600 -- 00:33:22,070 you can do it.
152 00:33:24,350 -- 00:33:25,510 you can do it.
no, 154 00:33:33,080 -- 00:33:34,120 calm down.
155 00:33:34,290 -- 00:33:35,020 calm down.
156 00:34:19,450 -- 00:34:21,540 you can 157 00:35:31,320 -- 00:35:33,110 i have the virus in my blood.
158 00:35:34,060 -- 00:35:36,340 o negative i am a universal donor.
159 00:35:37,380 -- 00:35:38,640 it's worth trying.
160 00:39:39,500 -- 00:39:40,520 open!
161 00:39:42,080 -- 00:39:43.150 open!
162 00:40:18,950 -- 00:40:19,680 sonia ...
163 00:40:21,660 -- 00:40:23,000 open for me.
164 00:40:25,420 -- 00:40:27,130 i want to apologise, i am sorry,..
165 00:40:29,530 -- 00:40:30,540 marcus?
166 00:40:33,910 -- 00:40:35,450 open, sonia.
167 00:40:46,860 -- 00:40:48,880 i can not control myself.
168 00:40:51,030 -- 00:40:51,800 marcus?
169 00:40:53,720 -- 00:40:54,720 i open.
170 00:41:01,670 -- 00:41:02,870 get here.
171 00:41:07,950 -- 00:41:09,010 i love you.
172 00:41:39,820 -- 00:41:42,870 the first injection will transfer you into a deep sleep 173 00:41:47,760 -- 00:41:50,010 with the second one it will make your heart stop.
174 00:41:51,720 -- 00:41:53,280 and it can cause dizziness 175 00:42:01,550 -- 00:42:02,590.
sorry...
176 00:42:39,650 -- 00:42:42,000 i love you so much.
177 00:43:48,750 -- 00:43:50,290 i'll be back, my love.
wake up.
180 00:45:25,910 -- 00:45:28,170 you take the pedal 181 00:45:29,800 -- 00:45:30,900 sorry for the head 182 00:45:32,090 -- 00:45:33,020 noah...
183 00:45:33,250 -- 00:45:34,470 no.
184 00:45:36,690 -- 00:45:37,700 frank 185 00:45:38,490 -- 00:45:39,620 are you military?
186 00:45:46,930 -- 00:45:48,950 you were at the radio?
187 00:45:52,330 -- 00:45:53,990 stay with us.
were are the car keys?
188 00:45:54,930 -- 00:45:56,830 i do not know 189 00:46:01,320 -- 00:46:02,880 in any case, there is no fuel.
190 00:46:04,990 -- 00:46:06,700 i think she is joking us, frank 191 00:46:07,980 -- 00:46:09,290 in the call she said that there were two of them 192 00:46:09,870 -- 00:46:11,390 where is your friend?
193 00:46:14,460 -- 00:46:15,220 i lied.
194 00:46:17,700 -- 00:46:21,470 i'll kill you ... and ran into the woods.
you think this nonsense frank?
196 00:46:29,660 -- 00:46:30.610 bitch!
197 00:46:33,040 -- 00:46:33,980 cafe.
198 00:46:37,550 -- 00:46:38,850 two sugars.
199 00:46:46,080 -- 00:46:47.690 i have no interest in walking 200 00:46:53,370 -- 00:46:55,570 you're going to win the walk in the forest.
201 00:47:02,830 -- 00:47:03,870 slowly, slowly ...
202 00:47:04,910 -- 00:47:06,190 it was easy to fuck!
203 00:47:06,500 -- 00:47:07,240 shit!
204 00:47:15,450 -- 00:47:16.290 what happened?
205 00:47:17,510 -- 00:47:19,960 some cannibals attacked us and we fled as children.
206 00:47:21,150 -- 00:47:22,760 he jumped in the mouth of one to help his brother.
207 00:47:23,740 -- 00:47:25,320 more details?
208 00:47:30,290 -- 00:47:31,290 nice toy for a physician.
209 00:47:39,610 -- 00:47:40,990 it was supposed to come back 210 00:48:01,360 -- 00:48:02,940 the keys are there frank.
211 00:48:03,420 -- 00:48:04,890 why not remove them?
212 00:48:05,700 -- 00:48:06,990 a bullet in it.
213 00:48:07,720 -- 00:48:08,720 and go.
214 00:48:12,130 -- 00:48:13.660 we care about others, frank.
215 00:48:15,200 -- 00:48:16,800 he told me always.
216 00:48:21,540 -- 00:48:22,660 losing 217 00:48:24,330 -- 00:48:25,540 just you and me.
the radio works 219 00:48:50,190 -- 00:48:51,320 not working.
220 00:48:52,310 -- 00:48:53,830 you can only receive not send.
221 00:48:57,770 -- 00:48:59,780 there's a military base in noah 222 00:49:00,650 -- 00:49:02,320 helicopters fly from time to time.
223 00:49:03,010 -- 00:49:05,200 fuck, helicopters do not stop ever 224 00:49:05,410 -- 00:49:07,630 you know you have housing, nothing sucks.
225 00:49:20,410 -- 00:49:22,050 three days he carries us.
226 00:49:22,430 -- 00:49:23,530 if i were you, i would not go near.
227 00:49:25,050 -- 00:49:27,370 more than bloodthirsty..
these monsters are shit.
228 00:49:30,100 -- 00:49:31,170 aret you not dead?
229 00:49:33,150 -- 00:49:35,320 tomorrow morning we go.
230 00:49:35,370 -- 00:49:37,620 we must gather fuel and return here fast.
231 00:49:40,300 -- 00:49:41.690 i will not go out without the keys.
232 00:49:42,100 -- 00:49:43,000 first fuel.
233 00:49:45,410 -- 00:49:46,610 after the keys.
234 00:50:48,010 -- 00:50:48,760 for your blood 235 00:50:50,790 -- 00:50:51,790 need 236 00:50:59,660 -- 00:51:00,760 i'm infected.
not me.
238 00:51:13,090 -- 00:51:14,150 i am expecting a baby.
239 00:51:29,790 -- 00:51:31,310 it is necessary to know ...
240 00:51:34,060 -- 00:51:35,610 was there a radio where you were?
241 00:51:40,270 -- 00:51:41,180 take me there.
242 00:51:41,880 -- 00:51:43,140 i have to call the military base.
243 00:51:45,250 -- 00:51:46,550 the keys to the ambulance?
244 00:51:47,920 -- 00:51:48,990 where are you going?
245 00:51:56,670 -- 00:51:58,210 even under the rubble.
246 00:51:59,570 -- 00:52:01,660 i want to bury my family.
247 00:54:13,810 -- 00:54:15,710 can you help?
yes.
248 00:54:19,030 -- 00:54:19,770 toma.
hurry ..
250 00:54:54,870 -- 00:54:56,620 calling urgent basis in noah.
i repeat..
251 00:54:57,530 -- 00:54:59,590 calling urgent basis in noah.
252 00:55:00.020 -- 00:55:02,630 six survivors are in a large building in the middle of the jungle.
253 00:55:03,140 -- 00:55:05,930 you flew over us several times, you know very well where we are.
254 00:55:07,030 -- 00:55:09,900 this message will be distributed in open frequency.
255 00:55:11,280 -- 00:55:14,920 call urgent basis in noah.
please come for immediate evacuation.
256 00:55:16,250 -- 00:55:20,110 emergency call.
we are in the infected area.
please come for immediate evacuation.
257 00:58:06,080 -- 00:58:06,930 use it!
258 00:58:10,280 -- 00:58:10,980 lets go!
259 00:58:11,770 -- 00:58:13,000 finish your message.
260 00:58:23,210 -- 00:58:25,810 dupri is sonia i'm pregnant...
261 00:58:44,870 -- 00:58:46,590 he bit, but i'm immune.
262 00:58:57,410 -- 00:58:59,410 i repeat:
i was bitten, but i'm immune.
263 00:59:57,690 -- 01:00:02,770 my name is sonia dupri.'m pregnant ...they bit me, but i'm immune.
264 01:01:12,660 -- 01:01:14.380 naebete i wanted.
265 01:01:34,200 -- 01:01:35,900 take the keys!
now!
266 01:01:59,200 -- 01:02:00,570 the fuel?
267 01:02:01,090 -- 01:02:02,070 fuel ?
268 01:02:03,920 -- 01:02:05,160 the fuel?
answer!
270 01:02:51,740 -- 01:02:52,640 what was that?
271 01:02:54,230 -- 01:02:55,510 frank!
shut up!
272 01:03:24,240 -- 01:03:24,720 frank!
273 01:03:25.480 -- 01:03:26,280 a tree?
274 01:03:27,000 -- 01:03:28,400 what the fuck?
they are coming!
275 01:03:28,550 -- 01:03:29,480 come !
close the damn door!
the damn door!
fran!
278 01:04:14,160 -- 01:04:14,780 fran!
279 01:04:25,270 -- 01:04:26,750 it's not your fault!
280 01:04:32,000 -- 01:04:32,700 come on!
281 01:04:36,060 -- 01:04:36,920 lets go 282 01:05:46,350 -- 01:05:46,980 wow!
283 01:05:49,700 -- 01:05:50,150 fran!
284 01:05:54,350 -- 01:05:56,590 if you open it ...
i'm going to burst!
285 01:06:52,310 -- 01:06:53,000 frank ...
286 01:08:21,450 -- 01:08:21,720 open up!
287 01:08:22,000 -- 01:08:23,380 take your hand off, get out!
288 01:08:31,320 -- 01:08:32,070 fran!
fran!
fran, fran!
291 01:08:40,530 -- 01:08:41,390 fran!
292 01:09:33,110 -- 01:09:34,250 come on, almost ..
293 01:09:56,720 -- 01:09:57,440 sonia!
294 01:10:00,580 -- 01:10:01,440 sonia!
295 01:11:49,590 -- 01:11:50,900 base noah, "1-s-61".
i repeat:
noah basis, "1-s-61".
297 01:11:55,370 -- 01:11:57,060 military intervention in an open area.
298 01:11:57,590 -- 01:11:59,000 risk:
level four.
299 01:11:59,680 -- 01:12:01,260 priority evacuation confirmed.
300 01:12:02,240 -- 01:12:04,290 i repeat priority evacuation confirmed.
301 01:12:05,600 -- 01:12:06,950 medical class.
302 01:12:09,210 -- 01:12:10,570 individual:
sonia dupri.
303 01:12:11,780 -- 01:12:12,740 code "rosemary".
304 01:12:13,530 -- 01:12:14,280 code "rosemary".
305 01:12:16,160 -- 01:12:17,570 "s-61", base of noah, understood.
306 01:12:18,150 -- 01:12:19,560 twelve minutes eta 307 01:21:37,520 -- 01:21:38,650 are you sonia dupri?
308 01:21:41,000 -- 01:21:42,290 are you sonia dupri?
309 01:21:46,480 -- 01:21:47,520 we shall take care of you.
310 01:21:47,550 -- 01:21:48,310 and the baby.
subtitles fly-5
__file_terminal__
geass 5
the princess and the witch
stage 6
the stolen mask
begin the attack!
gloucester?
they're not supposed to be in serbia!
their bulky knightmares are no match!
they should have surrendered when they had the chance!
what?
cornelia...
don't tell me, with only one machine...
so this means that the creatures of area 18 have fallen, right?
princess, about the mobilization effort...
sorry, i'll have you accompany me in finishing it.
no need.
your section has been secured.
area 11 will be difficult to handle.
i understand.
i will find you, zero... to avenge clovis!
i'm home.
welcome home, lelouch.
welcome home, brother.
from the looks of it, you've already ate dinner.
i was worried.
i thought that you might have been caught up in the chaos that person named zero caused.
i called you, but i couldn't reach you.
brother?
c.c.-san came all the way here to see you...
c.c.?
your friend is quite interesting, having only initials for a name.
yeah...
could it be... that she's your girlfriend?
huh?
our futures are intertwined with one another, right?
by future, do you mean marriage?
no!
no, it's not like that.
so, um... she's kidding...
i hate jokes.
i see.
i'm surprised at how quickly you decided, brother.
but they say, "to each his own", so it may not be that strange, i suppose.
ah, what are you doing c.c.?
you're all wet.
here, you need to go to the bathroom.
i'll get you a change of clothes too.
nanali, i'll clean it up right away, so stay right there.
also, we were lying before...
a lie, a joke.
who are you?
i told you.
i'm c.c.
that's not what i mean.
you're...
supposed to be dead?
do you like it?
the power i gave you.
as i thought, you're...
are you unsatisfied?
no, i'm grateful.
you pushed my schedule forward a great deal.
schedule?
the plan to destroy britannia.
i thought that it would be a little while longer before i could make my move.
do you think you can destroy it with just that power?
i was planning to do this even without it.
as expected, you're an interesting person.
what are you going to do from now on?
you're being pursued by the military, aren't you?
even if you say the military, it's only a small portion of it.
it's enough if i just keep a low profile.
i'll put up with it here.
hey, you're planning on staying here?
men sleep on the floor.
that's not the point...
if i get caught, you'll have problems too, won't you?
being together is even more dangerous.
if i sleep out there, i will be caught.
not at your convenience, but at mi
i hate persistent people.
you're being very careless about this.
more importantly, how did you survive?
how is your backbone?
and that contract you were talking about...
good night, lelouch.
fukushima, kouchi, hiroshima.
this makes it seven incidences since zero appeared.
after zero appeared, other groups apparently became more hard-working.
because of that "orange" incident, substitute supervisor jeremiah has lost his leadership.
he doesn't have the ability to do it.
thanks to that, the cooperation with the police and unions are in shambles.
it's quite an inconvenience for us as well.
lend us your strength, toudou!
thanks to zero, britannia is in a state of confusion!
now is the time that we, the japan liberation front, should make a stand!
don't rush it!
the information that kyoto is giving the crimson brocade to zero is not definitive.
if you concentrate on zero too much, they will pull the rug out from under you!
hey, in the end, what did "orange" mean?
what?
you won't answer anyone's questions at all, but you'll ask me questions, huh?
if you don't want to answer me, then you don't have to.
just like me.
orange" was just a casual remark.
but...
there are those who will want it to mean something and will start to analyze it.
the entire world is searching for you.
the entire world is moving because of you.
lelouch, is this what you wanted to see?
no, this disturbance is merely part of the calculation.
the world will plunge into an even greater chaos.
private kururugi suzaku of the district 11 military, case 1075, concerning the suspicion of prince clovis' murder.
we declare you acquitted due to lack of evidence.
why... all of a sudden?
please get out of the way!
look out!
um... are you injured, or something?
i'm sorry!
i didn't think there would be anyone below.
oh... no...
i didn't think that a girl would be falling from above either.
oh?
is... something wrong?
yes!
something is wrong!
eh?
to tell you the truth, i'm being chased by bad people.
so, can you please help me?
we cannot allow that "orange" to affect princess cornelia's arrival.
at this rate, the loyalty of us, the purists, will be questioned.
is that true?
that sir jeremiah is wild...
then what is "orange"?
at any rate, it's a fact that sir jeremiah is guilty.
saying that he does not remember anything... it's the same excuse as patre!
sir jeremiah's memories are jumbled.
it's the same with those who had their sutherlands stolen in shinjuku.
and...
i haven't introduced myself yet, have i?
i am...
yuffie.
yuffie?
yes.
i am...
you shouldn't do that.
you're famous.
the son of former captain kururugi, private kururugi suzaku.
it was a lie, right?
the story about being chased by bad people.
meow.
meow meow?
are you hurt, meow?
meow meow meow
meow?
meow
meow meow?
meow?
oh my.
we're late, i hope he's waiting for us.
but was he really acquitted?
apparently on lack of evidence.
well, it looks like he was thoroughly investigated, thanks to that incident with zero...
oh, why...?
huh?
do you dislike cats?
well, i like them, but...
it appears to be a one-sided love.
kind people are the ones who have one-sided loves.
it ran off.
yuffie?
why did you lie just now?
are you concerned about me?
eh?
uh, yes.
well then, please come with me for a little bit!
when we're like this, it doesn't seem too different from being in britannia.
you're from the motherland, yuffie?
yes!
i was a student up until last week.
until last week?
then, what are you now?
by student, do you mean a high-schooler?
you can go sightseeing whenever you want, right?
you ask a lot questions, don't you?
oh, sorry.
ah, no, that's not what i meant...
um... today is my last day off, so i wanted to see what sort of place area 11 is.
then it didn't have to be me...
no, i'm glad it was you.
oh, i see...
suzaku-san, could you take me to one more place?
you may request anything of me, princess.
then to shinjuku...
please show me shinjuku, kururugi suzaku-san.
lelouch-kun.
are you busy right now?
hm?
what is it?
it's about that phone call from before.
phone call?
um... you know, that time in the bathroom...
ahh.
do you know if there are call logs?
i want to contact that person.
it's the school's phone, so i don't think...
i see...
i thought so too...
that woman...
what?
what's wrong- whoa!
no way...
hey...
hm?
what are you doing?
ah, what indeed...
to return to the motherland like this...
i shouldn't have gotten involved with that woman...
are you an idiot?
don't just go wandering around!
i'm okay as long as i'm within the school grounds.
don't be so strict.
no, you're an outsider here.
i'm an outsider no matter where i go.
what's with that person?
oh.
so she's at it again today.
again today?
i placed a geass on her which makes her carve a symbol on this wall every day.
geass?
this power.
during the contract, that's what i heard.
a test to find out the length of duration, huh?
it's best to understand the specs of your weapon, isn't it?
if you're too uncontrollable, then...
i wonder if it would work on me?
don't worry.
you and i are accomplices.
i won't do anything that would put us in a disadvantegous situation.
the shinjuku ghetto is finished.
people had finally begun to return, but...
aw...
as i thought, they won't use the rg's against elevens.
hey, over here.
it's the aftermath.
hurry up and take the picture!
i know!
take a picture of me next!
me too!
is that true?
the information about zero.
yes, it is information from sir curel.
all right.
put a cordon on the 4th zone of the shinjuku ghetto.
understood, sir.
sir curel... we will leave the rest up to you.
i wanted you to contact sir jeremiah, but it seems you probably won't, isn't that right?
get out of here, you britannian pigs!
stay here!
wh-what?
you're just an eleven!
we're japanese!
don't call us elevens!
what are you saying?
you guys lost to us, you dogs of a defeated country!
why you britannian...
please stop!
don't resort to violence!
don't get in the way!
this guy...
you... are you kururugi suzaku?
kururugi, the guy who killed clovis?
you idiot!
the one who did it was zero!
this guy is just a slave.
so what if he's an honored britannian?
acting so happy...
selling your pride, comrades and soul...
are you even japanese?
that's not it!
i...
that is it!
you dog of britannia!
please stop!
i'm an individual who has received training.
don't fight with your comrades anymore...
what do you mean by comrade?
hey!
let it go.
that traitor...
suzaku!
are you all right?
yes.
it's not okay!
my prime g and mx 4 are...
you were too late!
jeez, for being honored...
why did you let them go?
you should have finished them off!
you've killed many elevens before anyway, haven't you?
who do you think is feeding you?
i will not allow you to insult this man any further!
in order to use the geass, one must look directly into the opponents' eyes.
there is no problem penetrating through glasses.
maximum distance is about 270 meters.
after having the geass cast on them, or when it's in effect, there is a noticeable gap in memory.
this is thought to be damage caused by the geass invading the cerebrum.
if it has the property of light, then reflection is also possible.
you sure have studied it a lot in such a short amount of time.
the opponent is an empire which has subdued over a third of the world.
there is no such thing as exercising too much discretion.
understandable for elevens, but you're britannian, aren't you?
britannia is much too large and powerful of an opponent to fight with just one geass.
so everything would be okay if i were strong?
i wonder if it's bad to be weak.
at that time... for us 10 year olds, the world appeared to be a very sad place.
fear.
sickness.
corruption.
decay.
discrimination.
war and terrorism.
the repeated chain of hatred.
a foolish vicious cycle.
someone must break this chain asunder.
quite an idealist.
of course, i don't think that it is possible to get rid of all of that.
i'm not that arrogant.
that's why...
i would at least like a world without war.
a place where we won't lose dear ones.
such a convenient world...
what can you do to...
it's easy.
if someone wins, the fighting will end.
someone?
i don't know yet.
but if i stop aiming for something, my father will have died in vain.
captain kururugi's...?
in that war, my father had to die!
jeremiah!
today, we will make you pay for the sin of allowing the murderer of prince clovis to escape!
cowardly curel!
so the information that you found zero was a lie!
before princess cornelia arrives, we must cleanse the shame of our fellow men!
jeremiah, this is a purge!
suzaku-kun!
cecil-san!
it's dangerous here!
get on!
the purists are having an internal conflict.
let's hurry up and get out of here.
oh, and sorry about interrupting your little get together.
you'll have to do it another time.
please wait!
wouldn't this be a good chance to get battle data on the lancelot?
eh?
suzaku...
sorry, yuffie... we must bid farewell to each other here.
i have to go.
if i have lancelot, i should be able to stop them.
so!
dammit... four on one...
cowards!
don't worry, jeremiah.
we'll treat you like a warrior.
there will be no shame to your family name!
are you serious?
are you seriously going to kill me, curel?
be silent, "orange"!
why do you think we exist?
it's for the imperial house, is it not?
all hail britannia!
please stop!
don't fight amongst yourselves as britannians!
that's... the honored britannian...
the collaborative weapon, lancelot!
what does a special envoy want?
if you are going to interfere, we'll kill you regardless of who you are!
no!
i can't allow a meaningless fight to go on!
mvs stands for maser vibration swords.
mvs?
so they were already implemented...
but, i'm not backing down!
among your own allies...
he's going to save me?
kururugi suzaku is...?
even if i can just take out "orange"...
sir jeremiah!
is that viletta?
thanks!
do you still plan on fighting?
everyone back off.
curel...
so we've come to an understanding?
i'll use the chaos bomb.
eh?
stop!
what?
that honored britannian...
using his own body as a shield...
both sides, lower your weapons!
i will command you in my name!
i-it cannot be...
i am the 3rd imperial princess of britannia, euphemia le britannia!
eh...
yuffie...?
i will take control of this area.
stand down!
as i thought... the imperial princess...
did you know that, lloyd-san?
yeah.
she rarely appeared to the public because she was a student.
i-i am truly...
i am truly sorry!
imperial princess!
eh?
on top of me not even being aware, i have been acting extremely rude to you.
suzaku...
just as you lost your father, i have lost my older brother, clovis.
will you lend me your strength so that others can get by without losing their loved ones?
yes!
your kind words are more than i am worthy of!
i heard about it, euphemia.
don't do such reckless things.
i'm sorry, sister.
however...
while we are here, call me governor-general, vice-governor euphemia.
a distinction is needed precisely because we are true siblings.
yes, i understand.
also, concerning the measures being taken...
yes, the preparations for the welcoming of the imperial princess are being readied in the government office...
you are lacking.
you are weak.
you are being sluggish.
what of zero?
capture the enemy of the empire's people!
zero!
eh?
from today on, i will be a student at ashford academy.
i'm kururugi suzaku.
pleased to meet you.
yeah, i know.
i'm lying.
to shirley and rival...
even to suzaku and nanali.
but...
i can't go back...
i can't return.
if c.c. is my accomplice, then i have to use that.
because i don't want to lie to myself any longer.
__file_terminal__
we're sorry, but plenty of people in england haven't seen us
for everybody to see us at once, we'd have to do a world satellite tv show
it was supposedly the very first satellite hook-up around the world
i don't know how many millions of people but some phenomenal amount
it was probably the very earliest technology that enabled that kind of satellite link
george martin record producer john wrote all you need is love specially for the television show
it was a commission.
brian suddenly whirled in and said:
we are to represent britain in this round the world hook-up.
write a song
because of the mood of the time, it seemed a great idea to do that song
everybody else was showing people knitting in canada and irish clog dancers in venezuela.
we'll just sing all you need is love
it's a kind of subtle bit of pr for god, basically
i don't know if the song was written before that
we were making an album at the time so lots of songs were in circulation
paul may know more about that.
over to you, paul
i'm not sure...
it was john's song, mainly
i don't think it was written specially for it but it was one of the songs we had.
george martin might have a better idea
it was certainly tailored to it, once we had it
but i've a feeling it was just one of john's songs
we went down to olympic studios in barnes and recorded it
it became 'the song we should use'.
i don't think it was written for it
yeah, they wrote it specifically for that, and we all dressed up again
we were getting to love dressing up!
and we had another suit but mine was so bloody heavy
simon and marijke from the fool - that was the company - had all this beading on - as we'll cut to right now
it just weighed a ton
it was a fabulous time, musically and spiritually
we'd prepared a basic track for the recording, for the tv show but we were going to do a lot live
the orchestra was live, and the singing and the audience and so on
we knew it was to be a live television show
there was also a camera in the control room, on us doing our bit
about 30 seconds to go on the air, there was a phone call
the producer of the show, saying "i've lost contact with the studio
you'll have to relay instructions to them as we'll be on air any moment now
and i thought if you're going to make a fool of yourself... do it in front of 200 million people!
the man upstairs pointed his finger and we did it, one take
our world global satellite broadcast 25th june 1967
i still believe all you need is love but i don't believe that just saying it is going to do it
i still believe that love is what we all need
and it was for love
it was for love and bloody peace again.
it was a fabulous time
even now, i'm still excited when i realise that's what it was for
people putting flowers in guns, san francisco was just exploding
here was fabulous california, where we are, l.a.
it was just exciting times.
and all for this loving feeling
and music.
the whole rest of it was just music
there were psychedelic posters coming in from san francisco.
great!
the summer of love's a little bit too easy, but some sort of golden summer
everywhere we went, people were smiling and sitting on lawns, drinking tea
festivals of music and stuff
that summer of love, a lot was bullshit, just what the press were saying
but there was definitely a vibe
in america, we could feel what's going on, even though we were miles away
you could just pick up the vibes
i was all for going there and living on the haight
in my head i thought acid is it, this is the answer, let's go
i'll go there and make music, but of course it didn't come true
in the end george went over
i went to haight ashbury expecting it to be this brilliant place and it was full of horrible spotty drop-out kids on drugs
it certainly showed me what was really happening in the drug cult
it wasn't what i thought - of all these groovy people having spiritual awakenings and being artistic
it was just like the bowery, it was like alcoholism
it was like any addiction
so at that point i stopped taking it the dreaded lysergic
i had some in a little bottle, it was liquid
i put it under a microscope and it looked like old rope
i thought, i'm not going to put that in my brain any more
i was influenced by acid and got psychedelic like the whole generation but really i like rock'n'roll
it was one of those things that happened as life went on
we'd been into drugs and the next step is to try to find a meaning
that's where i really went for the meditation
there's this thing called a mantra
and a mantra is...
through the mantra, you can follow a technique that helps you to transcend
to go beyond the waking, sleeping, dreaming state
so ok, i need a mantra - where do you go?
you can't go to harrods and get a mantra
then i met david wynne, who showed me a picture and said he's coming to lecture
he's called maharishi.
so i got some tickets
then i thought, i'll get some in case the others want to go
oh yeah!
so we went along and i thought he made a lot of sense
he basically said that with a simple system of meditation 20 minutes, morning and evening no big crazy thing, you can improve the quality of your life and find some sort of meaning in doing so
after the lecture-because the beatles could get in anywhere - so we got backstage, met maharishi
i said to him "got any mantras?
give us a mantra!
he said "we're in bangor tomorrow, you should come and get initiated
at that time maureen was in hospital having jason
i was visiting
i came home and put on the answerphone
even in those days we had answerphones
a message from john: "we've seen this guy and we're all going to wales
and from george: "wow man, we've seen this guy, maharishi.
he's great!
we're all going to wales on saturday.
you've got to come
the beatles seem to be among your supporters.
how do you feel about that?
maharishi mahesh yogi i feel a great fondness for the younger generation
if the beatles take up this transcendental meditation they are the ideal of energy and intelligence in the younger generation
that will bring youth to a very good level of understanding and intelligence
i am very happy that they heard my lecture last evening
we talked after the lecture.
they seem to be very intelligent and alert
we'd rung our mates: "he's great this guy, you ought to come and see him
it was like a good book you'd read.
hey, try it, i'll send you a copy
that kind of thing.
come, he'll be there, come with us
we got up there and there was a crowd to meet us
we all wandered through in our psychedelic gear 25th august 1967 it was like a summer camp
you sit around and he tells you how to do it
you go to your room and try to do it, and of course you can't
you sit there and you've got a mantra to meditate on
you think, bloody hell, that train journey was a bit much-sorry, mantra
bloody hell, i wonder what our next record's going to be... oh stop, stop!
you spend all your first few days just trying to stop your mind... dealing with your social calendar, whatever's coming up
god, he's a funny bloke, that mah...
oop, no, but it was good
i was really impressed with the maharishi.
he was always laughing
so we listened to his lectures and we started meditating
we were given our mantras
it was another point of view.
we were getting into eastern philosophies now
you just sit and let your mind go.
it doesn't matter what you think about
then you introduce the mantra, the vibration, to take over from a thought
you don't will it, or use your will-power
i seem to recall it was a phone call
somebody came to us at bangor and said that he'd died.
we were off finding the meaning of life, and he was dead
neil aspinall tour manager i heard it on the car radio that he'd died
the local shopkeeper said "sorry about the news
what news?" he said "your friend's died
our friend has gone
i don't know what to say, we've only just heard 27th august 1967 he was a beautiful fellow and it's terrible
what are your plans now?
we haven't made any, we've only just heard
it's as much news to us as it is to everybody else
i spoke to him wednesday evening
the evening before we first saw maharishi's lecture
he was in great spirits
i understand that this afternoon maharishi conferred with you all
could i ask what advice he offered you?
he told us not to get overwhelmed by grief and whatever thoughts we have of brian, to keep them happy because any thoughts we have of him will travel to him, wherever he is
we were all gutted, you know.
it was a huge shock
he was one of the people we had known longest
a huge confidant of ours
when anyone dies like that, it's the shock that you won't see them again
the blood drained from the face, you know
brian's dead
there was very little we knew, other than that he'd been found dead
we just knew... well, that's it
it was very strange for it to happen at that precise moment
we'd just got involved with this meditation
your belief system gets suspended because you don't want to hear it
you don't know what to do with it, anyway
if you look at our faces in the film, all a bit like...
what is it?
what does it mean?
our friend has gone
more our friend than anything else.
brian was a friend of ours
i don't think there was anything sinister
rumours came out that it was very sinister circumstances
but those are easy to do after the event
i went round a couple of days later - brian had a butler working for him and he didn't seem to feel there was anything suspicious
he felt that he wasn't in any sort of black mood
he could have been.
i don't know.
but my feeling was that it was an accident
i don't believe he committed suicide.
i believe it was an accident
in those days, everybody was topping themselves accidentally by taking uppers andlor amphetemine and alcohol
that happens, you know
i feel that happened with keith moon, one too many...
i can deal with it
jimi whatever...
jim, mama, all those people
i don't think any of them set out to die
have you a tribute you'd like to pay to mr epstein?
we don't know what to say.
he was one of us, so you can't...
we can't pay tribute in words
i knew that we were in trouble then
i didn't have any misconceptions about our abilities other than to play music
i was scared.
i thought we've fucking had it now
brian epstein 1934- 1967
there was a huge void, we didn't know anything about... our personal business and finances
he had taken care of everything
i suppose it was chaos after that
we were kind of managing ourselves
it was very sad to lose an old mate under those circumstances
but i don't think the major worry was what next, not having a manager
we'd been moving away from that
we decided we had to keep on trucking
they'd always discussed whatever they were doing with brian
now there was nobody.
there was brian's organisation but we hadn't related to that, we'd only ever related to brian
we were suddenly like headless chickens.
what are we going to do?
that's when neil stepped in and tried to figure out what was happening
as far as i was concerned, we had to get it together
but the other people out there, brian's associates if you like accountants, lawyers, all that sort of stuff
i think maybe the lunatics had now got hold of the asylum
what were the beatles going to do?
and so there was a lot of... different advice coming in about what they should do
we decided we needed an office and organisation of our own and that's really why we expanded apple, 'cos apple already existed
i think it was a publishing company in an office on baker street
paul made an attempt to carry on as if brian hadn't died
i think paul had an impression we should be thankful for what he did
for keeping the beatles going
at some point john got a bit annoyed, saying...
paul's trying to be the leader of the group and stuff
it's possible that i was there more than anyone
when we did magical mystery tour, i ended up kind of directing it even though we said the beatles have directed at the end
just 'cos i was there most of the time and the late night chats about the next day's work would tend to be with me
it was paul's idea
it was basically a charabanc trip which people used to go on from liverpool to see the blackpool lights
they'd get crates of beer and an accordion player and all get pissed and just go... pissed in the english sense, meaning drunk... and just go to see the blackpool lights
it was a very flimsy kind of thing
i think it was paul's idea.
he and john sat down...
i think in paul's place in st john's wood, and they just drew a circle
then marked it off like spokes on a wheel
we can have a song here
we can have this here, we can have this dream sequence there
they mapped it out, but it was a bit rough
then he came and showed me what his idea was
how it went round like this, the story and the production
he said here's the segment, you write a little piece for that
it was paul who came with a piece of paper, the way we used to work
i'm not sure, it could have been mine
i'm not sure whether i want to take the blame for it
we were all in on it but a lot of that stuff could have been my ideas
i was coming up with a lot of concepts, like in sgt pepper
we all worked on all the stuff but i was coming up with a lot of ideas
we looked through the actors' book, the spotlight or whatever
oh, we need someone like that and someone like that
and we needed the large lady as my auntie
i was going to play this person with this auntie
we weren't doing a regular film, it was a crazy '60s film
i am the egg man and i just wandered off to france and did that fool on the hill stuff
just one morning with a couple of mates.
it wasn't quite union
i remember quite a bit of it really, in a big hangar down in kent
we were driving round this airfield in a mini cooper
your mother should know
that was quite interesting, i enjoyed that
there were always good songs
a couple of good songs and a few funny scenes
the scene to me that stands out is the one of john shovelling the spaghetti on to the fat woman's plate
that was the best bit of the movie for me
that was an actual dream he'd had
he'd come in and say "hey, i had this wild dream last night.
i'd like to do it
we'd just put them in.
it was very haphazard
looking back on it, you learn by your mistakes
it's quite interesting now, looking back on it as a period piece
people like spielberg...
i've read that people like him have said:
when i was in film school, that was a film we really took notice of
like an art film, rather than a proper film
but of course we then released it
got it shown on the bbc on boxing day
they showed it in black and white, and so...
it was hated
they all had their chance then to say they've gone too far
who do they think they are?
what does it mean?
if you look to your left, ladies and gentlemen, the view is not very inspiring
ah, but if you look to your right...
so that was really slated but when people started seeing it in colour they realised that it was a lot of fun
especially that aerial 'ballet' shot
we went all over iceland, sent a guy out filming
in reality we hadn't done it... as professionally as it could have been done
but it was our first go at that sort of stuff
it was in a very traumatic period of everybody's career, if you like
we did the best we could
i think under all the circumstances it really turned out very well
i think we thought it was ok, we were quite pleased with it
at the time it was all right, not the greatest thing we'd ever done
i defend it because nowhere else do you see a performance of i am the walrus
the only performance ever so that's enough to make it an interesting film
and now we're going to play a track from magical mystery tour which is one of my favourite albums because it was so weird
i am the walrus is also one of my favourite tracks-because i did it
it has enough little bitties going to keep you interested 100 years later
we brought the beatles to america in 1963
they can't be with us in person on our show, december 10th when cbs and mayor lindsay will be naming this theatre after our show
but they sent this cablegram from london:
winter has come again to great britain and we sit by our fires, warming our feet
we send all love to you and everyone looking in
we are happy to be on your show, you too... too
have a beautiful christmas and a sincere new year.
love, the beatles
signed by john lennon, paul mccartney, ringo starr and george harrison
but tonight, although they can't be here, here are the beatles on film
that was very thoughtful of the guys who prepared that for us
incidentally, hello, goodbye is their latest hit record
in london, when the beatles open a shop, everything slows down
a rolling stone's throw from orchard st - apple, the beatles' new boutique
to mark the opening, the proud owners gave an apple-juice party
john lennon and george harrison were the hosts, the other two were out of town
paul's in liverpool and ringo's in rome
disc jockey alan freeman talking to cilla black
opening of the apple shop london 5th december 1967 richard lester, director of the beatles films, among the 'in' crowd
on sale will be books, jewellery, paintings, hippy clothes and furniture
apart from the loony clothes and the hippy flower power stuff
there was supposed to be different music they now call world music on sale
that's what we're supposed to do and sell all these books about various things we were into
various art or spiritual things, incense and whatever
all that kind of stuff.
it looked quite good
the building was very nice-the painting was gorgeous.
the fool did that
a group of artists from holland put this beautiful big mural on the wall
the council got their knickers in a twist and said paint it white again
we said it's beautiful.
everyone loves it.
some residents probably objected
so then we were going to paint it white and project it from opposite
you know we were full of that.
they were good ideas
some you didn't get round to doing but it was a great ideas time
far from the noise and pace of city life in the clear air of rishikesh, north india
pathe news reports from the meditation retreat of maharishi mahesh yogi
the man who through transcendental meditation is currently bringing peace of mind to the beatles
rishikesh is an incredible place
99o/o of the population are all renunciants
it's right in the foothills of the himalayas
it's where the ganges flows out of the himalayas into the plains of kurekchetra between delhi and the himalayas
we were away from everything.
it was like a recluse holiday camp right at the foot of the himalayas
it's like a mountain, but it's the foothills, hanging over the ganges
it was pretty exciting, we were in this really spiritual place
we were meditating a lot
we were having seminars by maharishi
it was pretty far out
it was very much like a summer camp
you would get up in the morning, go down to a communal breakfast
the food was veggie, which is good for me now, but thinking back...
i was still meat-eating then, so it was all right, it was curries and stuff
the food was impossible for me
i'm allergic to so many things
i took two suitcases, one of clothes and one of heinz beans!
we sat in the mountains eating lousy vegetarian food and writing all those songs - we wrote tons of songs in india
dear prudence certainly got written there.
mia farrow's sister was...
she sort of hibernated and meditated
we saw her i think twice in the two weeks i was there
everyone would be banging on the door, "you still alive?
donovan was there and i remember i had a song called i will
do you remember a film show in the village?
what was that?
did you write anything, george?
obviously not
i wrote sour milk sea
i wrote a number of songs which i never recorded.
i wrote dera dhun
why don't you play it for us, george?
i don't know if i know it
something like that
there were lots of things the maharishi had said-like that song c'mon c'mon
c'mon it's such a joy
everybody's got something to hide except for me and my monkey
apart from the bit about the monkey, that was just what maharishi used to say
a helicopter landed by the banks of the ganges in rishikesh
one of you can go up for a ride with maharishi, who's it going to be?
me sir, me sir, sir, sir" and of course it was john
john was good at that, so it got to be him anyway
later i asked "why were you so keen to get up with maharishi?
to tell you the truth, i thought he might slip me the answer." very john!
i gave myself a set period, then if it was something we had to go back for
i was thinking of going back
but at the end of my month i thought, this'll do me
if i want to get into it heavy, i can do it anywhere-you don't need a church
i didn't come back with the others, anyway
i don't recall
ringo probably came back quickly
he went for a couple of weeks to put his toe in the water and see what it was like
and paul just came and went
george and i were there four months.
we lost 13 pounds and looked a day older
do you think this man's on the level?
i don't know what level he's on
but we had a holiday in india and have come back rested to play businessmen
whose idea was apple?
i don't know
it was around, i think, before brian died
i think apple was the accountants' idea
you must diversify
the big theory was to put all our affairs into one bundle
we'd have our own company apple, a record label, all we'd ever wanted to do
they all rang from england one morning and said we're starting this company, apple so we upped and went to live in surrey and i became apple press officer
the sole purpose of apple was so people didn't have to beg any more-artistes
if they had a valid idea we would front them
we had a publishing company, a record company
we should have had a big sign:
you don't have to beg
the idea was we'd go to america and we'd say:
apple is starting - send us your huddled talent...
we're interested." so we wanted a nice big launch
i had a strange feeling, i was very nervous
i had a real sort of personal paranoia on me
i don't know if it was what i was smoking then, but it was very strange
i remember being interviewed and john was doing great
he was wearing a bus driver or prefect badge
what's that mean?
mr lennon, can you tell us what it is you're wearing?
it's just a white button and that's 'bus prefect'
and that's what?
bus prefect
he's in charge of a bus
they went on the johnny carson show but johnny carson wasn't there
joe di maggio, i think, was the guy
because johnny was on holiday
it was one of the things that john said on that show:
we'll just spin it like a top and see where it goes
what do you see in the years ahead?
apple... we'll try and set it up and then see where it goes
it's like a top.
we'll set it going and hope for the best
that was pretty much what happened actually
we had some ideas...
wouldn't it be nice if... because we got screwed in business all the time
you know how you have to go down on your knees.
john famously said:
we don't want people to have to go down on their knees
it's a business concerning records, films and electronics...
apple press conference new york 14th may 1968
but we want to set up a system whereby people who want to make a film don't have to go on their knees in somebody's office-probably yours
well, we did this mad thing
maybe put an ad in the paper, saying:
send us your tapes and they will not be thrown away.
we will answer
we were just inundated with tapes and poetry and scripts
i don't think we got any bands or any artistes by that method
we never really got much from the tapes sent in but people knew we were interested - peter asher brought along james taylor
derek taylor apple press officer when i started at apple in april '68, james taylor was already there
he was in the office with paul and peter asher
mary hopkin was the main thing, you know
i didn't bring her, she was on a talent show
mary hopkin came from the hughie green...
whatever his show was called
opportunity knocks!
i think mal evans found badfinger, who were called the lveys at the time
badfinger i thought came through paul
and i produced doris troy and a record by jackie lomax
jackie lomax
james taylor
the iveys
badfinger
mary hopkin
anyone was welcome to show up and produce as much as he wanted
but people didn't do the same amount of work
i lived in london, i was there more so i probably did a bit more production than ringo
i'm not sure what ringo did
i wasn't as involved as the others
it was fun.
we'd go in
a lot of what it did related to the four of us
john wanted to do stuff like zapple
he wanted a funky label that he'd do crazy stuff on so that became his area, which was quite nice
maybe it was exciting for everybody else and for people from outside
for me, it was a lot of hard work setting it up and a lot of chaos
i was still in india when it started
i think it was basically john and paul's... madness, ego running away with themselves or with each other
it's just trying to mix business with enjoyment
we find ourselves in business
are you the directors of this?
yeah, but all the profits won't go into our pockets
they'll go to help people but not like a charity
we were just guys goofing off, having a lot of fun
trying to get things under our control, which a lot of people do now
they have their own companies, take lawyers to meetings, get good deals
it was the start of all that but a pretty haphazard start
we had a lot of ideas of we could do this and we could do that
but when it came down to it really all we could do was write songs, make records and be beatles - successfully
or maybe twice there was an unearthly paradise called pepper land
the first thing when we heard they were going to do a cartoon about a man who sailed to sea and went to the land of submarines...
go down under the water, see these things, meet all the people living there
but we were into psychedelic stuff with pepper and they wanted more of that kind of stuff
it was up to them and we went along with that and they had the 'sea of holes'...
i think seeing it now it's pretty good, quite interesting really
yeah, i liked the film.
i think it's a classic film
we never did our own voices but probably the actors were better
you needed to be more cartoon-like, our voices were pretty cartoon-like anyway
but the exaggeration with the actors' voices
i think it suits it
that's where all of that stuff came from...
that terrible fake liverpool accent
they do look very nice, don't they?
yes, they do
they do though, don't they?
yes, they do
what's the matter fellas?
blue meanies?
the thing with that film that still blows me away... was all the kids coming up to me, saying "why did you press the button?
as you know, i pressed that button to get shot out
kids from all over the bloody world shouting "why did you press the button?
don't touch that button
which button?
that was the panic button
the film does go for every generation
every four-year-old goes through yellow submarine
hey!
look at john, will yer
what's the matter?
blue meanies?
newer and bluer meanies have been sighted.
there's only one way out
how's that?
singing!
one... two... three... four...
yoko was having an art show in london at the indica gallery
i heard this was going to be a happening so i went the night before the opening
the first thing as you went into the gallery was a white step-ladder and a painting on the ceiling and a spy-glass hanging down
i went up the ladder, picked up the spy-glass.
in teeny writing it said yes
if it had said no or something nasty... like rip-off or whatever, i would have left the gallery
because it said yes, i thought it's the first show that said something warm to me
so i decided to see the rest of the show and that's when we met
the naked album cover was less general than that
meaning that was one of the first things we did
we felt like two virgins, that's what the album was called
we were in love, just met and we were trying to make something
he showed me this cover and i pointed to the times
oh, you've even got the times in it," like his dick wasn't out, you know
i said "come on, john, you're doing all this stuff
it may be cool for you but you know we have to answer
it doesn't matter which one of us does something, we all have to answer for it
he says "you only have to answer the phone" so "ok, fine
from that point on they were never to be seen without each other for the next few years at least
the trouble was for us it encroached on our framework that we had going
basically it had only ever been the four of us in the studio maybe with neil and mal as the two roadies or george martin up in the control room or an engineer to fix a mike
but in our whole recording career that had been the setup
i used to ask john, "what's this about?
what is happening here?
yoko's at all the sessions
he told me straight:
when you go home to maureen
and tell her how your day was, it's 'well, we had a good day in the studio"'
and he says, "well, we know exactly what's going on
that's how they started to live - every moment together
everybody seemed paranoid except for us two in the glow of love
everything's clear when you're in love and everybody was tense around us
what is she doing here at the session, or why is she with him?
all this madness because we wanted to be together all the time
subtitles:
screentext
__file_terminal__
aaa bbb ccc ddd eee fff ggg hhh iii jjj kkk lll mmm nnn aaa bbb ccc ddd eee fff ggg aaa bbb
***for what you're about to see.
this footage was sent to us by our viewers.
it appears that wilhelmina slater
has been struck blind by the fashion gods.
si since the "mode" diva's former lover connor owens
bolted with the meade millions,rumors have been swirling
that la slater is off her game.
,ll,t rst came e the endden announcemen
that,ga,she'leav"mg "mode.
and now with reports that willie's hunk
of great barrier beef has met an untimely demise
ait arsears fhe former ioshsh icon gas gone e ioatat barmy.
oh!
kes!
aah!
what is going on?
to answer that question,
i'm going to put "mode" coeditor-in-chief daniel meade in... the haute seat
oh,daniel.
it's time to dish.
has willie come undone?
or do you feel her pain
after having gone through your own recent tragedy?
tragedy" is not in my vocabulary,suzuki.
to be honest with you,
i feel that molly's with me every step of the way...
supporting me,guiding my decisions.
did she pick last month's cover?
because it was heaven-sent.
that's really funny.
seriously,just,you know,
i'd really like to take a second
to talk about something i am really pumped about.
it's this-- this amazing organization called the community of the phoenix.
okay.
not doing an infomercial here.
the community teaches us to break down the barriers between life and death.
we never have to say good-bye.
or do we?
this has been "the haute seat" with-- see,with the wings of the phoenix on our backs... we can accomplish anything,suzuki.
both of us!
stand up.
come on,stand up.
i don't want to.
say it.
anything.
what is he do-- whoa!
come on,say it!
anything!
come on,buddy!
you're stretching my turtleneck!
hey,natalie,is daniel around?
nope.
okay.
well,i just want to talk to him
about the interview he did this morning!
he's super busy today, but i'll be sure to let him know,okay?
bye.
okay,thanks.
clogs,willie?
you were wearing clogs.
they're very comfortable.
stopt!
stop it.
ami am sorry about connor,
but have you lost your mind?
listen to you.
you're talking about comfortable shoes.
has the world gone mad?
everything is not about fashion,marc.
i will let that slide because we both know i deserv it.
willie,our futures are tied together.
think of us.
you're n ger gonna get another job wearing syntheti gardening footwear!
marc,do you think i haven't tried?
i've already prostrated myself before the mummified remains
of claire meade and begged for my job back.
and?
she said no.
at least,i think she said no.
when she opened her mouth,a cloud of dust came out.
so if you'll excuse me,i need to find another way
to save my daughter's ass.
hey,mandy.
no time.
have to get to the big editor's powwow.
matt asked me to take notes so he doesn't miss anything.
again?
where has he been all week?
um,location scouting in the bahamas.
but now he's back, but he had to go to the doctor this morning.
he strained something during tennis.
hope it wasn't a groin muscle.
put some ice on it,woman.
marc,he respects me.
he asked me to stay late
every day last week to go over fashion layouts.
mandy,that's not respect.
it's called "i'm out of my league.
i don't know what the hell i'm doing.
please do my job for me.
you say po-tah-to.
anyway,i've decided to ask matt out.
really?
what about betty?
i thought you weren't going the full hartley
because the furry one still had feelings for him.
well,i wasn't.
but then i talked to betty about it, and she said e's totally over him,so i got the green light.
and in case that conversation happened in my head,
betty's not gonna know about it 'cause i'm gonna date him in secret.
hi,furry.
hi,marc.
daniel.
so i saw the suzuki interview
and i really don't thinkit was .
the beard's working for you.
oh,thank you,betty.
but maybe we can tell them you were on allergy medication
you kn find a way to spin it.
spin it?
why would we need to spin it?
you were great.
i was so proud of you,
spreading the word about the community.
you were awesome.
i don't think "awesome" is the word most people are gonna use-- isn't it time to get the meeting started?
mm,absolutely.
let's rock and roll.
and you-- you can sit right next to me.
daniel,he's staying?
yeah,of course.
and he brought some friends.
okay,people,we're shooting this issue in the bahamas,
so let's not hold anything back,okay?
let's keep our minds focused
and our pitches free of any negatronic energy.
betty,please,kick it off for us,would you?
sure.
okay,a fun fact
the bahamas used to be a notorious pirate haven.
in fact,they were home to two of the only known female pirates
anne bonny and mary read.
so since this is the "fearless" issue,i was thinking we could...
shoot the models dressed like pirates,plundering booty...
but also showing booty.
uh,betty,didn't pirates kill people?
well,yeah.
they also had scurvy,
but i didn't think we'd focus on that.
you know,more so the bandanas and the hoop earrings.
i am getting a lot of negative energy off this idea,
and we wouldn't want it to toxify this whole meeting.
so what else have you got,hmm?
come on,betty.
i think you'd find it altogether...
daniel.
i assumed it was just me he was cutting out of his life.
it all started when he hired
that girl natalie to be his assistant.
then came the community meetings,
the counseling sessions,the phasing.
and now they're telling him what he can and cannot put in his own magazine.
well,there's a name for people who take over your life that way,
who make all your decisions for you,
who cut you off from all the people who care about you.
it's called a cult.
i need to talk to him.
i don't care that i'm not in the right phase or whatever!
i'm gonna find out what's going on.
mrs.meade.
big fat package for you.
thank you,amanda.
south***
oh,poor baby!
let me help you.
does it hurt?
oh,it's nothing.
i just went for it,diving after a serve.
were you super sweaty and pantg?
not really.
actually,it was video game tennis.
you know,where you stand in front of the screen
and wave the thing around?
it's actually a really good workout.
you should try it sometime.
i'm game.
tomorrow night,my place.
what?
oh,i just figured since you're recuperating,
maybe i could make you dinner.
are you asking me a date?
who said anything about a date?
we are just two single,attracti people having dinner,
who may or may not have to get up early in the moing.
a friendly dinner sounds nice.
i'll see you tomorrow.
daniel.
betty?
what the hell are you doing here?
i didn't have a choice.
i've been trying to talk to you all day,
but natalie and bennett won't let me anywhere near you.
okay,look.
maybe they're a little... overprotective of me.
it's only because they're looking out for me.
looking out for you,
as in,running your editorial meetings
and cutting you off from your family
and everybody who cares about you?
bennett was right.
you'll never understand.
i'm trying to understand,daniel.
ou think i'd be staking out the men's room,
listening to strange guys go to the throom
if i didn't want to understand?
the copier repair guy was in here for 20 minutes!
betty,please.
daniel,we're friends.
why can't you just tell me what you're going through?
look...
i'm sorry.
it's just something you have to experience.
you're right.
i haven't experienced it,so...
it's not fair for me to judge something
that seems to be helping you.
what if i did an article on it?
an article?
why not?
i could do a profile on bennett and the community
get an insider's perspective.
then i could understand why this is so important to you.
everybody could.
it would be great exposure for the community.
i spoke to daniel.
and?
he called bennett.
he's giving meotal access
a "mode" exclusive inside the community of the phoenix.
we're in. ugly betty s04e07
hi.
i'm betty suarez.
i'm here to see bennett wallis.
miss suarez...
we've been expecting you.
thank you.
thank you for agreeing to do the story.
miss suarez,you are being given an extraordinary opportunity.
no outsider has ever seen what you are aboo to see.
and once you do,i can't be responsible for what may happen.
i'm just messing with you.
i'm sorry.
people think we're into all kinds of crazy stuff.
come on up.
let me show you around.
come on.
can i get you some phoenix water?
no,thanks.
i've already made your travel arrangements.
coach,i'm afraid.
but i'm sure you'll understand given the circumstances.
you're sending me to venezuela?
i know people there that'll keep you safe.
what the hell am i supposed to do in venezuela?
i don't know,nico.
work on your tan,hone your socialist manifesto,
stay out ofsprison.
but we had a plan.
pay off castelar
pay him off with what?
connor is dead.
there is no money.
but i can't leave you.
even if i go,they'll still come after you.
i'll be fine,sweetheart.
please,mother.
maybe i can talk to him,work something out.
i am not gonna set up a payment plan with a blackmailer.
so unless you have another idea,
i suggest you go home and start packing.
your flight leaves first thing in the morning.
we appreciate the opportunity to set the record straight.
most people hear about the community,
and they think we're some kind of cult.
well,isn't that understandable?
i mean,a lot of what you say is really...
very...
kooky?
is it kooky to help people get off drugs,
get off ste streets,turn their lives around?
what'i going on over here?
just more of our good work.
great.
i'd love to see it.
i want to see all of it.
and i wish you could,
but that room is for level 7 members only.
no one else can enter.
i'm sure you understand.
well,i'm trying to understand.
that's why i'm here.
i-i'm trying to help everyone understand more about the community.
really?
i thought it was because you're afraid you're losing daniel,
that we're taking your friend away from you.
nope.
i assure you,i am here for the article.
please.
i understand.
it's painful to lose someone you're close to,
like your mother?
excuse me?
your mother.
you lost her,didn't you?
how do you know about my mother?
it must have been devastating for you.
of course it was devastating.
how do you know about my mother?
i can tell you miss her so much.
you think about her every day
w--uh,no,not every day.
okay,i think that's enough.
maybe you're at work or riding the subway.
suddenly,you realize you can't even remember
the last time you thought about her.
every day,she's becoming more and more difficult to see,
and you hate yourself for letting that happen,
don't you?
just letting her slip away.
we don't let that happen here.
.ah. i'll be right there.
i'mrterr sly sor,miss suarez, we're gonna have to reschedule.
colin here will show you the way out.
i've enjoyed this immensely.
no.
derisive laughter.
i'm intrigued.
couture***
gimme that!
shame.
laundry day.
prada help me.
oh,my god.
oh,i don't want to know this!
look,i've tried everything.
she says there's no money.
you believe that?
she's just trying to get my price down.
she's a ugh bitch,you know that.
i think she means it.
you want this to work out,don't you?
of course i do...
detectivstcastelar.
betty?
well,what did you find out?
not much.
bennett was answering my questions
and telling me abt their programs.
that's good.
well,that's what i thought,
until he started talking about me...
and that i had lost my mother.
well,that's what con men do,betty.
they prey on the vulnerable.
you think he's a con man?
come with me.
i need your help.
you said you knew daniel's password.
and i do,but i don't know if i'm comfortable hacking into his bank account.
betty,this man bennett wants something,
and i guarantee you,it's not daniel's soul.
okay.
we're in.
what'd you find?
nothing.
you guys have a lot of money.
would you just see if there are any large transfers?
okay.
i'm not an accountant,but this all looks really normal.
what's going on?
nothing.
what are you doing in my office?
okay,and swing!
shoot!
no,no.
don't worry.
you're doing great.
okay,we need to get you in a little better position here.
let's move your hips more towards the tv.
higher.
uh,what?
or you could go lower.
either way works for me.
i think this is fine.
and swing!
okay,keep your eye on the ball.
oh,oh,by the way,thanks for covering for me
in the meeting this morning.
oh,no problem.
although,it got kind of crazy.
daniel invited all of his flight of the phoenix friends.
really?
to the meeting?
yeah.
it was all about phasing this and phasing that.
it was a little too "star trek" for me.
oh,come on!
okay,that was on the line.
this thing's a liar.
wait,phasing.
who was talking about phasing?
daniel.
ohand bennett,he's the head guy,the big bird.
bennett?
bennett wallis?
yeah.
do you know him?
i mean,this is really-- this is unbelievable.
you're actually breaking into my office,gog through my files.
what choice did you give me?
you're cuttie me out of your life.
you cut me out of yours.
sleeping with hartley behind my back?
cal is trying to save this company,
not hand it over to a bunch of crackpots.
these crackpots have helped me
through the most difficult time life.
daniel...
if they're helping you,then we're happy.
but don't forget that we're here for you.
we just don't want you to shut us out.
hello.
bennett,it's natalie.
i'm worried about daniel.
molly and i were barely getting started,
and she was taken away from me.
and at level 5,i caught a glimpse of her.
now tonight i am going to level 7.
and when i do,bennett says i can be with her whenever i want for as long as i want.
i know you think we don't underdand what you're going through, and you're probably right.
but listen to yourself.
you're gonna be with molly?
that doesn't make any sense.
no,you're right.
this is something we need to talk through.
i'm gonna go get a drink of water.
we can discusss. this
what are we gonna do?
i don't know.
yes?
oh,uh,hi,uh,mrs. meade,it's matt hartley.
i need to speak with daniel about this man he's been talking to,bennett wallis.
what about him?
hi,betty.
um,remember,uh,the time iold you that i moved to canada?
yeah,you wanted to be a mountie.
what's that got to d with bennett?
well,when i wp up there, i got hooked up with this self-help group,
the brotherhood of the northern lights.
it was run by bennett wallis.
what exactly did this brotherhood do?
some pretty crazy stuff.
but their big thing is that they promise people
that they could talk toirheir dead loved ones.
they'd give tememsps s ecial tha a at they said helpe "b ring down the veil betwe this world andndex n nt.
they-- they drugged you?
uh,no,not me.
i only made it to level 2.
but by the time you make it to l 7el 7,
they have you on some pretty strong stuff.
it gottty scary.
someone died.
oh,my god.
where's daniel?
daniel,we need to talk.
daniel.
daniel!
you're sure he's in there?
yeah,he's one of their celebrity members.
around him.
celebrity members?
bennett was always looking for high-profile people that he could rope in.
i mean,that's why he wanted me.
he was basically trying to get to my dad.
they're getting everything they want from daniel.
people are probably joining the community in droves because of him.
what?
not that i don't appreciate the help,amanda,
but what are you doing here?
um,i was in that cult for,like,five minutes last week,
so i know how they operate.
and when the shirt hits the flan, you're gonna want me on your team,suarez.
can we focus,please?
how are we going to get daniel out of there?
well,i'm sorry.
i don't know if i'm gonna be much help.
bennett and i left on pretty bad terms.
i was banished for life.
do you know what would happen if i even showed my face in there?
what?
get your hands off me!
all right?
do you know iho i am?
oh,okay.
all right,watch the thumb.
watch the thumb.
willie!
i have to tell you something.
what is it,marc?
nico and castelar... for god sakes,spit it out.
are you wearing my shoes?
mother,what's going on?
marc just brought me some rather troubling information.
i saw you.
what?
on the street,canoodling with castelar.
tell me this is not true,nico.
it's true.
you were going to send me away
to live with cousins i've never even met.
and i had to come up with some other way,
so,yes,i went to castelar.
i tried to bargain with him,get him to take less.
what i saw looked awfully cozy for a negotiation.
he said he would take less,but only if...
i was willing to...
offer him something to sweeten the deal.
i tried to go through with it,mother,
because i didn't want to leave you.
but i couldn't.
i'm so sorry.
you don't actually believe this load of horse apples.
willie?
get out.
willie,you can't possibly
get out of my house,marc.
let's go!
i said watch the thumb!
this place is a labyrinth.
are you sure this is the right way?
i think it's just right up here,level 7.
sme smell of crazy's getting stronger.
right this way. come on.
come on.
no.
here we are.
are you here for the session?
absolutely.
and we're really pumped to be here.
that's good,though most people aren't "really pumped
to be in grief counseling.
what she means by "pumped" is pumped full of emotion that she has no idea how to deal with,as am i.
that seems like a good place to start.
why don't you tell us about your loss?
amanda,we should be going.
my mother died.
amanda.
i never even knew her.
she put me up for adoption.
just when i figured out who she was,she was gone.
how did it happen?
a terrible accident.
she murdered her.
not everyone who starts this journey
is strong enough to finish it.
you two have proven that you are.
do you want to be with robbie?
yeah.
are you ready to be with molly?
i am.
it's a lot stronger than before,huh?
you said you were ready.
i hope i haven't misplaced my faith in you.
daniel!
no,you have the wrong address.
ooh,sorry.
i-it's okay.
continue.
i always knew that i was born to fashion.
i mean,this...
is not just some off-the-rack sperm and egg collision.
you know,it's-- it's destined.
it's genetical.
so when i found out that fey sommers was my mother
this fashion icon-- my life finally made sense.
but then it was all taken away.
i'm so very sorry.
i think fey would be very proud of your...
fashion sense.
i'm not mad that you murdered her.
i'm just mad that you murdered her
before i had a chance to get to know her.
guys,we gotta go.
you're sure he wasn't there.
i checked every other room on the floor.
we have to think.
where would they have taken him?
hey,matt.
where are you?
um,i'm in jail-- trespassing and disturbing the peace.
wait,jail?
here.
matt,he wasn't in there.
wait,what?
what do you mean,he wasn't there?
where else could he be?
i don't know.
i'm not the cult expert-- you are.
you tell me.
okay,okay.
uh,uh...
well,the whole point of level 7 is that you make this total connection with the person that you're trying to reach,
so you surround yourself with their things,
uh,touch their clothes,smell their perfume.
he never packed up molly's apartment.
molly's apartment!
he's at molly's apartment.
you guys are just gonna leave matt in jail?
we don't have time.
we gotta get to daniel.
come on.
on my team,you never leave a man behind.
whatever.
uh,brooklyn,please.
could either of you spare some bail money?
i'm so sorry,sweetheart.
i never should've tried to send you away.
but what are we going to do now?
you said we were out of options.
maybe not.
36... 24... 36.
my measurements.
it's a family heirloom.
i think it's worth more than enough to satisfy castelar.
you've had this all along?
why didn't you say anything before?
it's the one thing i vowed i'd never sell.
and there's only one thing more important to me in this world.
i have a few loose ends to tie up at the office tomorrow morning,
but i'll be back by 10:00,
and then we'll take the necklace and head straight to the airport.
we'll stick together and get through this.
no matter what.
can you feel her,daniel?
can you feel molly's presence?
no,um...
i'm not sure.
focus.
feel their energy.
draw them to you.
i'm trying.
i just,uh,i really
i don't think it's... daniel.
molly?
you're here.
yes,daniel,i'm here.
i can't believe this is you.
this is amazing!
daniel!
i-i-i can't allow you in here.
they're in a very delicate state.
you'll be in a delicate state if you don't step aside.
i am on to you.
i know who you are.
and if you've done anything to harm my son,
i will sue your ass right out of this world.
yeah!
now,l-- - don't even think about it!
molly,i missed you so much.
i know.i've missed you,too.
but we can be together now.
i mean,we can be together forever.
that's all i ever wanted.
me,too.
oh,i can't believe you're here!
daniel...
remember when i told you i never wanted you to forget me?
and i never,ever will.
but you have to.
just a little bit.
what are you talking about?
this isn't real,daniel.i'm gone.
and you can't live your life pretending that i'm not.
you have to let her go.
daniel,you have to let her go.
wait,who's "her"?
molly,i-i did this for you,
to--to be with you.
daniel...
let molly
why are you calling yourself "molly"?
stop!
okay?
let her go.
i can't.
i never got to say good-bye.
then say it now.
i'm right here.
say good-bye to me.
good-bye,m.
lly.
daniel.
betty?
mom?
darling,are you all right?
are you okay?
daniel,stay with us.
son,are you all right?
can you hear me,daniel?
daniel,are you sure you're okay?
i'm fine.
i still think we should go to the hospital.
natalie,wait.
look,you don't have to go with him.
just because you're giving up,don't expect me to.
listen to me.
we were supposed to do this together.
i know.
i can't see robbie unless you are with me.
bennett said
bennett has been using you to get to me.
oh,so...
so it's all about you?
that's not what i'm saying.
robbie was there!
it's not real.
bennett's been drugging us.
i saw your face...
how happy you were.
tell me that wasn't real.
natalie,please.
you have to say good-bye to robbie.
you can get on with your life.
i thought it was you that was gonna help me get there,but...
i guess it has to be someone else.
here,let me help you.
thank you.
open...
uh,you t have to feed me.
it's-- okay.
i feel like a dork.
why?
'cause i'm feeding you like a baby?
big bite.
um,no.
because i got rown in jail,and you had to bail me out.
whatever.
you totally saved the day.
we never would've found daniel without you.
you're kind of my hero.
incoming...
but we never got to finish our date
dinner.
friendly dinner.
can i make it up to you?
i think i can squeeze you in.
amanda?
i just wanted to say how glad i am
we were able to clear some things up last night.
me,too.
i took "you've reached the office of the murderer" off your voice mail.
well,i appreciate that.
he was a beautiful baby.
excuse me?
your son-- the one you put up for adoption.
i don't know what you're talking about.
you think a personal and confidential letter
from the south dakota department of child services crosses my desk,
and i'm not gonna steam it open?
call him.
this is claire meade.
i'd like to book a flight from new york to rapid city,south dakota.
i prayed i wouldn't find you here.
i was just getting everything ready for our trip.
oh,please don't.
do me that one final courtesy.
all right.
there never was a murder,was there?
no blackmailing detective.
just like there wasn't any plan for us to run away together.
yes,there was a plan.
you just showed up an hour early.
so who's your partner in crime,nico?
wait,let me-- let me guess.
uh,castelar?
oh,no.
castelar is really your "dead" boyfriend jonathan,isn't he?
why,nico?
what did i do to deserve this?
what did you do?
where do i even start?
how about sending me away
because you were too busy with your career
to even give a damn about me?
how many times did i even see you,growing up,mother?
how many holidays did we spend together?
are you surprised?
really?
i mean,i thought
i thought you'd be proud of me.
'cause after all you did to screw me up,
i'm still my mother's daughter.
get out.
i never want to see you...
again.
you'll get what you want,mom.
you always do.
donate or a keeper?
that was actually molly's "sunday morning new york times" coffee and,uh,croissant t-shirt.
so it's a keeper.
no,you can pitch it out.
it's fine.
you know,daniel,just 'cause you're saying good-bye
doesn't mean you have to get rid of everything.
well,yeah,i can't hang on to everything either.
it's just a crappy old t-shirt.
well,it doesn't matter if it's valuable.
it's about what it means to you.
like my necklace.
the pearls aren't real,it doesn't go with everything i wear,
but my mom gave it to me,so it was a keeper.
all right,i'll put it in the keep pile.
uh,i-- you know,i meant to ask you something about the other night.
remember when i was kind of off in level-7 land
and i thought i was kissing molly good-bye
and i kind of woke up and you were standing right there, sort of in front of me?
uh,did...
did we... yeah.
sort of.
i mean,you kissed me around the eyebrow.
i'm a lot shorter than molly.
oh,okay.
right,okay.
right.
ugh,what about these?
oh,get rid of them,please.
thank you.
i never trusted natalie.
i told you that from the beginning.
yes,you did.
you're always right.
__file_terminal__
of course i had my doubts.
of course!
but with regret.
regret about those doubts.
if you were to watch those lessons now then you wouldn't know...
that would be awful.
you can't look at it that way.
then it's as if you find yourself in a concentration camp or a madhouse.
we didn't feel that because it built up, but if you isolate a segment...
if you isolate a moment, you see awful things.
incredible...
he could throw you from from the attic to the cellar and from heaven to hell.
because what you had to look up in yourself you can't find that in books.
for some time, he had an enormous significance for me.
the way i had to frame my work.
what the approach was to of my roles and also my life.
everything, basically...
everything i still know about acting...
he expressed it.
he made an impression that changed my whole life.
my stage life.
he took me forward and he put me on a chair and sat facing me.
and then he said really, deep in your heart, you want to cry not laugh
it's as if they become religious.
and i don't like religious people.
hello...
i'm pierre.
i'm peerke.
pierre...
you won't be here tomorrow?
no, i won't.
that's a pity.
i'm pierre.
listen.
i always wanted to be an actor.
i mean, from my my very earliest memories, fantasies, dreams, i thought i have to act.
and...
and when i was at drama school and won a few awards and a few good reviews.
i thought i knew what acting was.
get it?
i mean:
that's what i am and getting better.
and then i met someone who had no idea at all what acting was.
but somehow he had a a drive and had decided to dedicate himself to to try and work out what the essence of acting is.
i wanted to record the myth.
to immortalise the magic or at least a fraction of it.
i thought that was my duty.
the three masterclasses i have been able to experience gave me so much that i felt guilty.
and after i met him and ever since really i met him, i also have no idea what acting is any more.
weird.
it's as if the concept turns inside out.
but i...
i am but i started to do it and, i think, better than ever really.
get it?
it's a vague upside-down story... well, with... with that... that man we're going to work now and that's nothing less than unique.
so, in short, i wanted to screw a plaque on the pedestal with the statue of my success on top.
a pedestal...
a pedestal with a plaque with the name of the father of my success.
so i called eindhoven drama school and said if you give me six students, i'll give them a masterclass they'll never forget.
but i come...
i was not allowed to know then what i would learn that day.
hey pierre!
how are you?
okay?
not bad.
i'll just...
sure!
okay!
mr bokma...
nice to meet you but why the camera?
it's not the right time.
no, no, no.
but we...
peer... we already talked about that.
i'm going to eindhoven with peer.
to eindhoven?
please leave, this is so irritating.
peer, what are you doing?
a masterclass.
are you doing a masterclass?
yes.
where?
where's he?
in eindhoven.
with children?
at drama school... what did you think?
i don't know about it.
all appointments with peer go through me.
it's been like that for 8 years.
i try to have a normal life with him.
peer, don't do it, it's a bad idea.
for god's sake...
but we already...
not with me.
just shut your trap!
keep your trap shut!
i have an appointment with mr bokma.
you don't make them.
we've tried to live normally for 8 years.
you know what happened with seth.
don't pretend you...
no, no...
but this is...
just the same!
there are lots of people present.
of course, there were lots of people there too.
we've tried to keep it under control for 8 years.
leave with your crew.
i don't want this.
we have discussed it at length.
you can't talk to peer without consulting me.
i didn't know.
everyone knows after that affair.
i didn't.
out you go, with your camera.
he'll be here at 8 and dressed!
let's do eindhoven.
i think...
i brought flowers.
it's a real bore, but we discussed it, didn't we peer?
let's do eindhoven.
good luck, guys.
is everything okay?
we agreed, didn't we?
she's unbalanced.
i don't mind cancelling, peer.
no, she's out of balance.
i saw that others feared him.
i had that least of all of them.
i was least scared.
i think i cried for 3 or 4 days.
i only cried.
i think that we... and we still do we really have a professional, but very very intense.
he said: "i can't see it happening.
i really can't.
i can't see anything happening in you.
why did you come here?
a primeval being, that's what he saw in me.
and me in him.
can you please do something about that back of yours?
i only have terrible memories of it.
something is said to everyone, but not to me!
that just gets...
if your presence is systematically denied you start to wonder what you're doing there.
he was just...
he became a second father to me, that's what it felt like.
something like that.
that was when...
he was messing with doctor's gloves...
he couldn't put them on, the fingers were stuck and he said.
i'm going to give you an internal exam and i thought he meant a test but he meant something else and he opened up a lot and released it.
twinkle, twinkle little star ...and i thought, that's enough.
these days you hear about boys and girls and timing...
if anything is ridiculous, then it's timing.
it's so trashy and people go on about it but i'm someone who goes on about not that i like going on at all but timing, i think that's chitchat.
it's not much use.
but on that same note, lots of people...
at least, i often hear "there's no tension", but tension is something...
as far as i am concerned, tension is a lie, it's a necessary lie ...but... well...
a pity...
driver, i want to drop by my mother on the way.
okay.
driver?
see my mother.
sure.
i don't think we can find her.
shall i help you look, peer?
yes...
i'll look over there.
i'ii go that way.
hey, guys!
a man of five?
19969-1974... '699... '70, '71, '72, '73... well. '74!
'74... '74...
i'd just moved.
yes, i was with janice.
janice was about 6 years older.
i am 64, janice would be...
she'd be 70.
maybe janice is lying here.
it's quite possible she's here too.
but it's still a kind of move, it's like moving.
maybe janice isn't here, but it's like moving.
it always will be.
she must be 70... 70...
i am 64, a man of 5...
a man of 5...
i found your mother's grave.
over there...
here it is.
yes...
mother was 69...
that's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5...
that's 699, and janice isn't quite 699.
that's too complicated.
70 - 1  69.
69, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5...
so now i'm... 74...
no, i'm 64...
so in 5 years i'll be 699 too.
and then i'm... yes.
i had the feeling that i am not really the right man in the right place on stage as such.
on the contrary, i experienced when i acted...
i often experienced seeing myself act.
then you hear yourself and you see yourself, more or less...
that's way beyond consciousness.
there's a variety of pain, of course...
most important is to tune pain...
you have to attune the pain in a positive sense to what is going on inside you.
you were talking about the destruction that you yourself...
that everything had to...
shame and pain have to destroy everything to empty and clean you...
not too sure about that.
mineral water...
let's go.
i insist on a glass.
in a glass...
a glass?
glasses?
we have cups.
i mean made of glass.
we don't have them.
back there maybe?
this is no use, is it?
sure!
great, sure.
i'll give you something for it.
i don't know whose it is anyway.
speed...
speed?
you understand?
what?
speed...
coming?
masterclass in eindhoven?
yeah.
sure.
thanks.
the masterclass... what did you actually feel at your mother's grave, peer?
when you stood there.
the same...
the same?
yes.
exactly the same...
let's not say too much about it.
very confrontational:
the moment when... we were talking about someone in my surroundings...
someone close had died.
and...
he went further and further into the feelings i had.
and eventually, through him...
i reached the conclusion that it was a great relief.
that's something you don't like to find out as you walk around crying and everyone offers condolences for how awful it is.
but you're pleased.
that's a moment, it's hard to say, but it was a long time ago, otherwise i'd have kept silent.
but that was a very confrontational moment.
i remember...
it was at the end of the last session.
i had to cry.
i was already...
it had been a long session, so i was quite upset.
my mother had just died, so there was lots of...
i cried and he he screamed at me.
and when i thought it was all over he put a table over me and i had to hold it.
then he stood on it.
so...
i had to exert a lot of force not to be crushed by him and the table.
at the same time he kept screaming and both the emotion and the fear of the pain...
if i did this, then i wouldn't have a face.
...until i couldn't keep it up anymore and then he went on fifteen minutes.
it lasted an hour and a half in all.
i was...
i was completely...
i was...
that was hard and i also memor unpleasant is too small a word, had disconcerting memories of the of that physical violence, hitting sometimes.
after hitting, it was embracing because sometimes you hated each other intensely.
and at the same time you wanted to squeeze someone.
that very extreme...
that is what i most remember.
i really remember everything, it was so sweeping.
something i never hope to experience again.
look...
it isn't easy to make me cry.
i mean it isn't difficult...
if you give me the idea i'm no good or it's no good then i'm out of action.
that's what a masterclass like that does and because many actors are masochists they think that something deep or special happens.
...but crying is meaningless and useless.
a litt/e, a little, everyone's a little in love a little a little in love is everyone you know, you know... you know, you know... you know 'cos you're in love
on the way to eindhoven in the car i felt i was no longer in control.
it's to stop the shine.
there's the classroom, the students are waiting.
and here...
this is the room where peer can prepare.
okay.
you can prepare here.
yes, then i'll come and fetch you.
okay.
can i speak to you alone?
yes.
let's leave peer alone.
what's going on here?
what do you mean?
a woman called, very upset and hysterical.
she knew about this and said...
okay.
she told me we shouldn't do it.
okay...
basically that's...
but that woman is off balance.
oh god, please don't peer!
don't do it!
but i called him!
i managed to keep things in order for 8 years.
for god's sake don't do it.
stay here with me peer!
listen to me!
shut your trap, now!
i have my own circle and you're not in it!
understand?
i mean, i'm responsible.
of course.
nothing will happen.
nothing at all.
so that's okay.
and who's seth aalbers?
and then came that incident with seth aalbers.
he was the only one of the group left.
the rest dropped out.
after that table, i wasn't...
i found myself in a park afterwards.
then he went off with seth aalbers and that lasted for another 8 hours and to peel off, let's say...
he kept saying that.
you're putting up a front, peel it off.
then seth left as the last and did something and literally peeled himself off.
his face, over gravel and stones...
he went completely crazy.
peer never gave another masterclass after that.
because he he can help you through a kind of barrier after which, without acting you reach the essence of...
it's almost impossible to say.
anyway, you'll see.
but i have to warn you.
this is not easy.
it's strange, weird...
it can be that you'll say i'll stop for a month or two.
that could work out with the summer vacation.
but you could think that, if this is acting acting in acting, then i'm not interested.
listen, that's how it is because the truth hurts, it hurts terribly i think.
and, um...
shakespeare once said...
that's the key to the issue...
behold...
...the horse that gains his power by defeat seeks his ambition in the fruits of thy learning.
yes?
hi, peer...
the kids are ready for you.
the kids are ready, so if you...
fine...
okay, i'll just take off my shoes, guys.
okay in a moment you can come forward one by one...
so come forward and peer will ask 1, 2, or 3 questions.
then you can sit down again.
right?
will a student come forward.
come a little closer...
what's your name?
barbara.
nice name...
thanks.
barbara, what do you think emotion is?
immortion?
emotion!
emotion...
what it is to me?
what emotion is to you.
if i think about it now, i think of chemicals.
chemicals?
yes.
substances in your body.
emotion, eh?
yes.
but that's what i think up now.
for you, it's but in other words, what's your position?
what's your favourite position?
standing up?
your favourite position?
you say: "yes, that's me"?
i most like to be open, that's what i most want to be.
i'm trying to move towards the physical.
physical...
but you think this is you.
i'm not too sure what i am.
that depends on the situation i am in.
can you make a sound right now?
yes...
i have to do something?
sound.
a little more?
i have to say something before i say anything to you.
the two exercises we just did...
it's important for the lesson to hold on to them.
don't let them go.
hold on to them because we'll come back to them later.
and you, what's your name?
jeroen.
he asked an older woman to stand up and show her best and worst physical features.
of course she did.
he thought that was awful, the way she did it, because it was so...
she blushed and turned away and was so unopen then he made me do that.
he made me stand beside her and do it too, also to convince her to get her there.
things like that.
that made me realise...
that he...
it had nothing to do with beauty.
nothing at all.
i thought:
god, i hope i'm not next.
as long as it's not my turn.
god, as long as it's not my turn.
but of course it was.
peer really put me through the mangle.
and you had to go on while he really laid into you.
you were defiled and afterwards you felt like that.
being next" with peer was something terrible.
what's your name?
robrecht.
one more time?
robrecht.
robrecht?
yes.
unusual name.
yes.
robrecht...
and may i ask, what's emotion for you, robrecht?
something that overcomes you, if it's genuine.
it overcomes someone at a certain moment.
like fate overcomes you
a clash of thoughts leading to a feeling.
it's a kind of mush...
i can imagine that there's one that predominates.
mush...
sorry?
mush!
a mush, yes.
i think something between instinct and thought.
a word flowing from instinct and the origin of thoughts.
yes...
i think...
and what i just said...
your posture, in which your physical your posture that you think is your posture.
this is me... so your posture...
it's more a "you" posture...
i prefer to sit.
go on then.
something like this.
martijn, can you now right now, that's what it's often about...
can you make a sound now?
i think a foetal position... what?
the foetal position.
foetal position?
most you...
barbara...
peerke.
sorry, peerke.
i think like this.
and in this posture, can you produce a sound?
my favourite is with my arms like this.
one leg rigid and the other...
rigid leg...
can you make a sound now, at this moment?
okay...
it's nice to see the women making high pitched sounds and the men low ones.
it is striking.
but that total command as if in a bubble...
and now i want to hear your sound...
okay, one more time.
you don't need to do it again.
but a little more expression.
yes.
i'm a little nervous.
no, thats fine.
very good.
no, but what peer means is that you can quickly resort to something obvious.
a little too easy.
but that's fine.
try with your sound and your emotions to produce it where it can't come from.
you understand?
acting has an illogical element.
something that is completely contradictory.
someone who makes something, an actor, knows what he's doing.
but the character as such has...
okay.
character?
the character doesn't have a script.
no script.
the character sees, hears and says everything for the first time.
the character says everything, sees everything for the first time.
what am i doing?
amazement...
go ahead... 2 x 3 equals 6.
the text is "what am i doing?
on both movements...
both, or...
first...
you carry him.
i carry him...
and then we change places...
this is fine.
and now the other two a little this way.
wait a minute.
i'll just say...
to make it easy, i'll say "action".
grab the legs...
all grab the legs...
yes, and then...
action...
what am i doing?
firmer...
let's see it firmer, i'll grab the hand.
it's amazement.
what am i doing?
relax! "what am i doing?" the wheelbarrow collapses.
and then surprise on the hand...
what am i doing?
so incorporate amazement in the exercise.
and we'll do the same thing with sound.
with your own sound, no text...
hold on to your amazement but only with sound.
right?
and make the sound "ripe".
so make it ripe!
okay...
okay, guys.
wait a sec.
walk around and relax.
don't talk but hold on to that concentration and i'll just go to peer for the rest of the lesson.
yes?
hi peer...
the students are ready.
so if you're ready too...
yeah, okay...
okay!
okay, i think we'll just wait about 20 minutes until peer is ready and then we'll carry on.
i want to hear a text from you.
the doubters present a message to me!
to me!
not to me!
it's very precise.
with text?
first with text.
the messengers the doubters...
the doubters...
the doubters present their message to me!
...to me!
not to me!
come for the cadence...
not...
only those three...
for me...
for me?
okay...
for me...
and not to me!
for me...
not for me!
show them how.
yeah.
messengers present their doubts to me.
for me... not for me.
then in your sound.
the first text...
the doubters present their message to me!
...to me!
not to me!
the doubters present their message...
to me?
not to me!
to me!
not to me!
no, that's no good.
no good...
it's been a while.
that's true, but it's no good.
try again?
yes, let's...
that's a pity...
should i incorporate my own sound?
yes, do.
go ahead.
the doubters present their message to me!
...to me!
no!
you don't get it.
no!
that wasn't it.
it wasn't, guys.
i don't get it.
it has to come from somewhere where you you consciously or unconsciously...
if you...
i won't be long.
he's confused.
he's seeking something.
what was pierre doing?
i was watching...
does pierre know what he's looking for?
apparently it did work once.
didn't it?
it's something that has to be there or not.
and not premeditated.
but it's so frustrating.
why is pierre the cause...
no, not at all, not at all...
i know you can't understand...
i want to be alone with pierre.
come on!
you do it to me.
you don't catch on to me.
not in any way!
i can't give the masterclass...
no, yes, okay but...
come on...
go away...
no, no...
this is very good...
present their message to me...
it's about the acting, i want to know what's up.
ask later...
both of them... they're such a show!
but you have to take it seriously.
i do.
if that's difficult...
i can't tolerate this!
i won't tolerate it from you!
you have to stay in yourself and from there, you expel it all.
in yourself, well, in me out of me...
in me, out of me, in me... come on.
try it just once, just once...
let's carry on.
don't worry...
calm...
breathe...
and breathe...
and release!
and ah... release!
calm...
they're children... children!
that openness in their eyes, that that turned to fear.
stop!
that was too easy.
fear of terror...
power.
fear.
calm!
pain!
power...
doubt!
okay...
one, two...
let's have two people come forward...
two.
and then... now try...
it's very difficult...
to breathe the calm of your partner.
breathe the calm of your partner.
be honest...
and on...
on...
can you do another exercise, maybe?
yes!
real madness!
and rest...
rest...
and rest!
not many people have seen madness!
i have!
and rest.
hold on to it.
and now rest your hands on each other's heads.
on your partner's head.
hold the calm!
and embrace each other.
and bend.
then not, and up.
and... yes?
okay...
yes.
it comes up.
yes, okay...
next?
next please.
take the chair.
like a softly sung invitation.
do what you want with me.
to the left and grab the hair!
grab your partner's hair.
grab your partner's hair and pull!
pull!
no...
look at pierre and me.
pull!
ouch!
christ!
one more time.
so you consciously grab your partner's hair and pull!
just a moment, guys.
stop.
just wait.
come with me.
here...
what's all this?
what are you doing?
why get so physical?
you nearly pulled my hair out!
that's how it should be.
no, no!
guys?
no, no way!
come on.
then the point arrived when when it was rebuttoned...
it came together and was unstoppable.
it was a tunnel experience and i slowly saw that...
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
what about me?
don't be afraid, pierre.
don't be afraid.
what about me?
keep it pure.
what about me?
and pure... what?
pure... what about me?
what about me?
don't panic.
what about me?
hardly any panic.
what about me?
what... what about me?
what about me?
yes... and pure.
what about me?
okay, is that good?
watch this.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
he doesn't like it.
he does.
yes...
this is a prelude to the destruction dance.
i want to head for the openness of the sun much more.
the sun can be closed but suddenly it's present in all its power and dynamics!
gigantic dynamics out of the sun.
you take it in and almost yourself really going down to your own nullity.
in balance...
and if we're in balance, we're on the right track.
because then you can incorporate all you want.
you feel that freedom.
lovely and free...
freedom, put it in.
put, put, put it in.
lea, why not put it in?
and that is what i said in the previous exercise that the messenger suffers doubt.
the messenger suffers doubt.
bring it out.
the feeling... the feeling...
the sunna...
the sunna feeling.
it's like a coat, it's walking and running.
...back and forth and a jump.
why no jump for joy?
there aren't enough jumps for joy.
that's why, when you walk you have to keep yourself, keep occupied and walk and walk and jump and jump.
it's not...
it has to express joy!
because peer mascini is a totally confused man...
that's his charm.
he doesn't know what he's doing, but you can't teach someone that.
acting is largely knowing what you're doing.
it has to have joy, pierre!
and only then can you have pleasure that will take you a long way.
you can go a long way with pleasure.
and then you don't need to sing.
the song is then in you.
the song is in you.
in you, and that's...
no, it's unequalled.
and if you then boil, high up, at a certain point you start to evaporate then you start to peel off.
peer...
you peel it off, steadily.
peel it off and roll it in a towel if you like.
roll it up.
but peel off, that's sensible.
and drag the skin along with you.
let it drag behind you.
peel, peel and peel.
what are you doing?
peer...
what's this?
stop this.
why?
let's stop.
let's not go on.
let's not go on for now.
why not?
because, that's why.
understand?
no, i don't.
i got angry.
i raised my voice.
i intervened.
did you see the kids?
they were fascinated.
we're stopping!
why are we stopping?
we're not going on!
this is enough to make me cry!
this is awful!
you're undermining me!
have you gone crazy?
madman!
did i come to eindhoven for nothing?
madman!
the myth as such.
he lost control of himself.
help me with my pants.
what's up, peer?
i'm leaving.
what?
i'm leaving.
really, two mature men!
i'm leaving!
sorry, guys.
dammit...
shit!
shit, come on!
peer!
peer?
peer, please.
posture, peer.
posture...
come on, peer.
calm...
we're going home.
that's all right.
okay.
a gooroo, or a guru.
how do you pronounce it?
that's what he was.
it's a pity he stopped.
but i saw his last lessons and...
i started to wonder...
he wasn't my peer any more.
it was the last evening after the last session, it was all over...
he asked me to stay behind.
it affected him too, giving a workshop.
a masterclass like that isn't easy.
he still had lots of energy.
and he wanted...
he had to get rid of it.
then he was vulnerable.
you always run away!
always on the run...
always gone.
i didn't understand what happened.
i never really did.
but peer is getting on in years.
it may not last much longer.
he's nearly 70.
men don't live as long.
i tried to banish him from my world of thought.
for a while i wanted nothing to do with him.
but now, after all these years, if people ask me then i can't help but admit his exceptional value.
but i never wanted to see him again, really.
and only later when i was really standing on the threshold of the centrally-iocated dance hall...
that's when i saw how the myth dismantled itself.
dedicated to theo van gogh
again, it's a very difficult exercise that needs precision.
so pierre, don't act.
every time you act then i'll say...
no...
go ahead.
yes?
you don't have to act dead.
it's not acting, but miniscule acting...
that's too much acting...
__file_terminal__
fuck knows why you can't meet anybody in this world...
tough, hey?
it's a day to fall in love.
because it's going to rain.
hello, ladies and gents.
l beg because l have to, not for fun.
shut your trap!
need a ticket?
take your money back.
go on, take it back.
get going.
leave me alone.
the fucker...
you've stopped me having what could be... what could be... a peaceful life.
feeling down?
the blues... l'd like to see my son again.
talk to him.
the last time l touched him, he was... he was tiny.
he must be big by now.
please, please...
bring him back.
for pity's sake!
bring him back.
look at me.
do l scare you?
goodbye.
sorry.
pick your money up!
pick it up!
what school does he go to?
hey, mister!
the ball!
it's here!
hey, miss!
the ball!
are we going to mexico?
do l know you?
not yet.
seen your face?
l'll get the dough... l haven't the time.
get going.
get going...
the sacr?
coeur, eiffel tower...
the champs elys?
s, the catacombs!
l dreamt of you.
we were on a gondola in venice.
l dig fat birds like you.
just like my mum.
ls there a problem?
no.
yeah, a problem.
you.
piss off!
piss off.
got a problem?
the southwest
got a problem?
yeah.
the fucker!
got me off-guard.
trust me.
l can't leave him here.
his parents are away.
l'm looking after him.
l know his dad well.
he's wonderful.
l shouldn't leave him with you.
why did you tell her all that shit?
she was asking too many questions.
yeah, she talks too much.
can you help me?
putting it here?
why?
lt's too heavy.
you're right.
can l kiss you?
you want to?
ok.
you really know my dad?
a bit.
what's he like?
a bit old, quite strong.
with an impressive look.
ls he scary?
no.
why do you say that?
he's a wanker.
traumatise my mum.
he'll do the same to you.
you had those grannies going.
me?
ls he your brother?
no, a friend.
do you know him?
no.
l know you.
me?
we met in the metro.
you were cutting up... chocolate.
get lost.
she came to get me, not you.
give me your number.
we'll call.
l ain't got a phone, fake blond.
he thinks it's my fault!
don't call me fake blond!
calm down!
he kicked me.
wanker!
show-off!
same to you.
show-off!
got 10francs?
begging at your age!
it's to play a game.
to play a game.
l've only got 2francs.
want 2francs?
yeah.
let's got to the baker's.
let's go.
can l have the cigarette?
what's your name?
got the time?
r?
i?
yeah.
and you?
louise.
got the time, please.
she doesn't speak french.
are you a babysitter?
today l am.
what about the other days?
l go to college.
but not much at the moment.
where do you live?
me?
yeah.
here and there.
you sleep rough?
you're a tramp!
no, it's not because l sleep rough.
l do it 'cos it's nice sometimes.
l lie down on a park bench.
nothing can beat it.
l see the stars and moon...
but it's cold in winter.
you must go home.
yeah, but no.
with the rats!
l never feel the cold.
l'm dressed for summer and winter.
l cover up in the summer and winter.
ln the summer, my sweat makes me feel fresh.
l'm never cold or hot.
rubbish!
lt's true.
have you never been to... hot climates?
they all cover up.
and they don't get hot.
l like going up escalators in the wrong direction.
l do it all the time in the metro.
hang on.
lsn't it here?
l made a mistake.
so where is it?
this way.
not back to my place.
nobody's ever in.
l get bored.
what about your mum?
no problem.
sometimes l don't see her for a week.
she comes home tired and sleeps for 2days.
then stay with me.
yeah!
what's her job?
l can't say.
you'll take the piss.
l'll take the piss?
yeah.
you won't tell?
she's a hooker.
you get me.
l get called son of a bitch.
your chick's here.
what you doing here?
chilling out.
who's he?
a friend:
r?
i, this is yaya.
who's this monkey?
he's not a monkey.
l got him in a school.
a school?
l've got presents.
for you.
you'll look like a christmas tree!
it's nicked.
some present!
give me the hat.
the best for you.
he's pissing me off.
say thank you, wankers.
thanks.
can you turn it down?
what's her problem?
you'll get a disco up the arse.
why are you sad?
me?
l'm not sad.
l'm a hoodlum.
l listen to jazz.
it's for you.
18carats...
give me back my wallet.
l saw what you're playing at.
just because l'm an arab?
bollocks!
want me to call the cops?
stop them!
wait... l know where to find them.
your mates are morons.
they're mongols!
all right?
yeah.
you ran a bit.
enjoying yourself?
we'll do things together.
see that chick?
she'd suck me off any day.
get sucked off in the clink.
you owe me money.
it's precious stuff.
l put it in here.
this comes from istanbul...
istanbul?
really precious.
this is from istanbul street.
the turkish workshops.
bullshit!
drop it.
l ain't got your dope.
knock it off.
see this?
lt won't feed me.
it's worth 10times more!
shall we do it?
yeah, let's.
want to see a trick?
stop fucking around.
don't touch me!
piss off.
cut it out.
lnsulting my family?
yeah.
well fucking don't!
are you crazy?
bastard!
fuck your mother.
he's insulting my family.
you're busting my ears.
hi, yaya!
l heard you got a deal.
yeah.
keep us posted.
where've you been?
coming?
l'm going this way.
meet you back here.
hi.
all right?
yeah, and you.
you're wearing lacoste.
got any for my brother?
how much?
we'll get to know each other.
no thanks.
l like your curls.
are you shy?
l bother this guy.
nick his wallet and give it to the kid.
he's my brother.
cute, hey?
yeah.
hello.
he's got a future.
you never told me.
he lives in saudi arabia.
let's go for a hot chocolate.
who are you?
she's a mate's chick.
she can talk to me if she wants.
who are you?
she's already taken.
don't touch her.
what's going on?
he's nicking greg's bird.
where do you think you are?
greg's inside.
we look after his bird.
let me talk.
piss off!
he didn't know.
he didn't.
he does it all the time.
shut it!
piss off.
he doesn't know anybody here.
want your fanny padlocked?
let's see.
it needs dressing.
it's deep.
let's go.
am l beautiful, miss?
magnificent miss.
why do women wear make-up?
l don't know.
don't ask that.
it's like that.
nothing doing, or it's war.
between who?
men and women.
that stings.
l'm disinfect it.
l'll disinfect you!
stop moving or l'll stop.
he's pissing me off.
you should go to hospital.
do l look like l would?
how do they cope in africa?
this is paris.
he's taking the piss.
that's enough.
get out.
racist!
thank you.
pretend you're talking to me.
l'm starving.
got any money for chips?
it's beautiful.
l collect them.
it's yours.
what about your collection?
l'll find other mercs.
fucking chemist.
l fuck his mother.
stop complaining.
drove me wild.
l feel great with this perfume.
what's perfume for?
to smell good.
what's that?
my mum's perfume.
it stinks.
she puts too much on.
l think she did.
thanks.
let's go.
want some?
hello, can l have a token?
too late, l'm closed.
a quick one...
sorry.
come back.
l'll pay 60francs.
no, tomorrow.
60francs!
keep your money.
get it going or l'll nick the till.
move it!
little jerk!
a token!
arsehole!
never!
shut it!
the bitch!
here are two.
it's your fault.
sorry.
you'll have the same scar one day.
ls that what you hope?
nice...
then stay at home and watch the box.
don't have one.
which proves you're crap.
funny, hey?
do you hate me that much?
stop acting the loser.
if she digs you, it's because she thinks you've got some dough.
this isn't santa barbara, friend.
what friend?
you don't even have a tv.
you're pissing me off.
you want to lay my bird.
no l'm not.
l'm not your scar...
can't you cut it out?
he's fucking with me.
you fuck with everybody.
can't you make an effort?
that's enough.
yeah, it is.
you look like a clown.
fuck it.
l'll take your make-up off.
let's go.
did you stay here?
he's my dad.
have you eaten?
l've found the ending.
to what story?
the ex-wife goes off with the acrobat.
really?
l'd rather she stayed and the husband left.
l didn't like him.
you think so?
lt's nicer.
evening, friends.
l'm r?
i.
on form?
evening.
he's my dad.
an italian?
stop it!
help!
you've got a beautiful woman opposite you.
what do you say?
a beautiful woman opposite me... l say to her... l'm in love with you.
it's impossible.
no it isn't.
l'm too old and you're too young.
it's possible... l drew that when l was a kid.
at what age?
l was nine or ten.
like you.
have you always lived here?
yeah.
ls this your bed?
no, it's your bed today.
but your bed when you were young?
sometimes.
here are miss moumoune, and miss lolotte.
they're kind and will keep watch over you.
ok.
goodnight.
l'm not sleepy, louise.
go to sleep.
look, it's so beautiful.
l dreamt about it 3times then gave in.
what's the label?
there isn't one.
you stole it?
yeah.
don't show off.
a lacoste warehouse was burgled thursday night.
a witness saw someone running off with a box on his head.
you're handsome.
have you got perfume on?
if l die, l want to be buried in a lacoste suit.
will you do that?
l won't leave you now.
are you angry with me?
about what?
getting into trouble.
no, but it's not worth it.
what's he doing here?
he's nowhere to go.
he's a loser.
you're jealous.
do l look like it?
if he ever touches you, l'll fuck his mum.
ok?
hear me?
fuck his race.
he'll never touch you.
this is good.
l'm out of here.
r?
i!
hi.
how are you?
ok.
what's wrong?
nothing...not feeling good.
you seem depressed.
come with me.
l won't be able to get it up.
it doesn't matter.
it'll be good.
if we haven't done it before, it's because...
then let's go for it.
you're like a sister.
lt'll do you good.
my mind's on other things.
hi, guys.
all right?
same name, same address.
same destination, fine.
nothing's changed.
hi, yvette.
l feel old.
got worries, maybe?
nightmare.
l met a girl today.
really beautiful...
too beautiful for you?
as beautiful as a modigliani.
that beautiful?
that's more of a problem.
and if you've nothing to offer her... l've got my heart, but so what...
your heart...
that's what you call a tramp...
someone's gonna cop it.
who are you?
r?
i.
a friend of louise.
l was here last night.
really?
your story, was it ltalian?
it wasn't italian, french, chinese, russian, it was... lt was a woman...
he loves her.
but l don't know it.
the story...
haven't you slept?
shouldn't you be at school?
don't talk about school.
l'll take you there if you like.
l haven't done my homework.
what's the point?
get dressed.
l'm taking you somewhere.
do we wake her up?
you're right.
listen to her.
stazionne...
what's that?
it's to... to make you scared.
don't you mind she's with yaya ?
why should l?
l saw you.
saw what?
you were sad.
to hide it, you pretended to pick up other girls.
well, we pretend.
we make them think we love them.
love's not a pretence.
look at the paintings.
what are you looking at?
ever seen louise like that?
yeah.
do you think she washes herself with her clothes on?
you've had a bath with her?
really?
don't you believe me?
that's children's luck.
you're a bastard and she thinks you're naive.
has a bath with you, sleeps with you and you're thinking of one thing.
that's the best bit.
that's napoleon's coronation.
it's no more beautiful than louise.
what's up?
l'm hungry.
then say!
have you finished?
thanks.
finished?
yes.
no good for diabetes.
thanks.
starter, main course and bread.
it's disgusting.
it's got their germs!
do they look ill?
how do you know?
does she look ill?
you're right.
eat up.
good?
delicious.
what are you doing?
make yourselves at home!
it's better off in his belly than in the bin.
what will my boss say?
who cares?
l can't let you do this.
wanker!
fuck your mum!
get yourself a lay.
that's no way to bring up a kid.
l don't care.
got a smoke, please?
thanks.
thinking about louise while chatting up birds?
l only asked for a smoke.
where were you?
next time, say exactly where you are.
look at you.
you're all dirty.
stop eating that.
shame on you.
let's go.
where?
to buy him new clothes.
where?
galleries lafayette.
they're so aggressive!
don't kick.
punch instead.
mind the bus.
fuck the bus!
lsn't the road wide enough for your bus?
he had a bump on his head.
l've got one too.
feel it.
if you had to choose between...two girls... l'd choose the bitch.
what about you?
l don't have to choose.
so you're happy with me?
yeah.
you have fun?
a lot.
that's why they get lifted.
and look like models.
they're barbie dolls.
l pity you guys.
easy.
you've got a bird.
we haven't.
third floor.
back here in 5minutes.
ok, in 5minutes.
can l help you?
hello.
on what floor are the beautiful women?
it's been a while.
so you left macdonald' lt's better here.
as you can see.
it suits you.
very classy.
l'm having a cigarette break.
coming?
yeah.
won't be long.
l'll bring her back.
they've all got died hair.
look.
looks like bugs bunny.
like it?
that's pretty.
lost the one l gave you?
wasn't it you?
no, it wasn't me.
who gave you this one?
and the earrings?
it's ours.
thanks.
want this?
yeah.
it's fucked.
security...
hello, can l use your mobile?
l've an urgent call to make.
ln paris?
yes.
not abroad.
ok.
l dial direct?
yes.
there's a bomb!
ladies and gents, for reasons beyond our control, please make your way to the nearest exit.
l've got to go.
you know where l'll be.
there's a bomb!
what next?
where now?
this way.
hi, r?
i.
hi, r?
i.
hi, girls.
how's your mum?
momo's looking for you.
we're being chased.
l need a way out.
we were at galeries lafayette. cops... lntroduce us.
hi, my name's selem.
l'm marion.
all right?
yeah.
want to go out?
when?
doing the splits now?
they're so beautiful.
say hello to my card.
this is a mate's mobile.
leave a message.
that's my phone box.
no way of sussing it?
what?
no way of sussing it?
leave her alone.
forget him.
l work in the export trade.
we can go on a trip.
my uncle's got contacts.
ls he in showbiz ?
on the dole.
let's split.
call me.
have you seen a group with a boy?
no... nobody...
excuse me.
don't worry.
goodbye.
what's that?
l don't know.
the eiffel tower, jerk!
fuck knows.
know the weather reporter on canal +?
l fucked her.
l think l'm really in love.
on my mother's grave.
l'm in love with her.
ain't she great?
l'm going to buy a mobile.
they don't work in the metro.
what do you know?
it's beautiful.
we said it together.
have you never fallen in love?
never?
you're as crap as them.
laugh if you like.
but l'm in love with her.
we believe you.
l'm looking over the avenue.
you have to make a wish on a roof.
really?
what can l... oh yeah.
done it?
yeah.
me too.
fuck.
that's not on.
look at you hairstyle.
need shaving.
then you'll be ready for the tough life.
don't move.
walk like me.
look.
nice and cool.
it looks good.
he stinks of cash.
ask him for some.
l don't feel like it.
go on.
we all have to work.
ask him.
why are you looking at him?
don't boss her about.
l was talking to my chick, not you.
l'll do it, yaya.
can l come?
no.
stay with r?
i.
excuse me.
sorry to disturb you but l'm in the shit with my brother and he has to eat.
l don't mind not eating, but not him.
l wondered if you could help with 50francs.
50francs?
normally it's 1or 2francs.
you can't even buy bread for that.
a pretty girl like you shouldn't be begging.
my boyfriend makes me.
he says it's easier for girls.
really?
l've got kids too.
a little girl, 3weeks old.
come with me.
fucking hell...
he's all hers.
life's wonderful.
we're going to take him for a ride.
his life will be a mess.
he's got too much cash.
we'll go away together.
a beautiful girl with long, slender fingers and well proportion head.
would you like kids?
sure.
a boy or a girl?
both.
daydreamer get locked up.
concentrat we've got work.
smell the cash?
l can feel he's loaded.
l'm on the case.
your mother's gonna suffer.
there's a cash machine.
he's going off with your chick.
l'll kill him if he touches her.
stay here, you.
there are things he doesn't need to see.
your code!
let me go!
wanted to fuck my chick?
let me go.
your code.
l've forgotten it.
where's gaby?
gone to buy a coke.
ls he ok?
yeah.
why did you cry?
l don't like doing that.
why did you?
because it's life.
the adventure, hold-ups, all that.
it's like a big hive.
there are friends and enemies.
you do what you like.
we're free... l saw you.
kissing with your tongues.
disgusting.
we weren't.
it's not dirty with the tongue.
l can imagine.
where've you been?
to the sex shop.
they sent me away.
so l went to quick.
bought an ice-cream.
where are the others?
we lost them.
did they nick the money?
dunno.
l didn't go to school.
shit!
we forgot school.
l better not go tomorrow.
why?
l'll be punished all week.
it'll hurt.
let's go.
yeah, let's go.
want a taste?
no, not really.
what does gaby's mum do?
it's a secret.
don't look like that.
you could tell me.
l won't tell the world.
l like to be trusted.
l trust you.
he trusted me.
if l lie, who will he be able to trust?
your lips are soft.
the girls you kiss are lucky.
yaya's lucky.
what is it?
l feel mediocre.
l don't do much.
nothing really excites me.
l can spend hours looking at the ceiling.
l feel l just do things to kill time.
all l have is other people.
l've got girlfriend who are happy.
they want to be architects or study insects.
flies get her high.
there aren't many dreams, so l have nightmares.
you feel lonely?
not with you.
there's gaby too.
it's difficult with him.
his father's in the shit.
l was meant to take him to him.
his dad's freaky.
l'm no good either.
l didn't even take him to school.
were you at school today?
and you?
we work, don't we?
it's breakfast time.
it's still night.
have you cried.
no, why?
she hasn't cried.
leila!
hi, louise.
come up.
l want to talk to you.
hi, nico.
have a seat.
you stay here.
what's up with her?
dunno.
here, peace pipe.
it's normal.
why do you dream of me?
l don't even dream of your sister.
this is nino.
lord of the manor.
hi, man.
yaya's friends are my friends.
lsn't life wonderful?
still with mouss?
officially yes.
go away.
leave us alone.
sadist.
have you kissed him?
yes.
really?
you're unbelievable.
if yaya knows, he'll do you in.
one way ticket to mars for r?
i.
what do you need.
it's all here.
l've got the best brands.
interested
no thanks.
l want to talk.
another time.
really?
where were you all?
ln the metro.
that's romantic.
do l look the type?
tell me the truth.
have you had her?
no.
l believe you.
understand me.
you're a lady's man.
they fall for you.
l'm wary.
do you love him?
who?
casanova.
l don't know.
he's caring with me.
he looks at me...
makes a change from yaya.
it's not the same.
l don't feel like he needs me.
l'm just an image for him.
l like that.
but l know yaya needs me.
he goes mad without me.
he'd spend his life in prison.
sure.
l prefer yaya.
why?
l just do.
l prefer black men.
can you massage me?
get out!
he pisses me off.
it's the third time.
sadist!
nic the sadist.
l need your help.
since you appeared, she avoids me.
tell me what to do.
explain to her kindly... that you love her.
you think l'd say that... to a girl?
the shame of it.
it's what l do.
louise, will you be my wife?
stop or l'll hit someone.
let's move on.
write to her.
could you do it?
got any paper?
dunno... ls that all?
yeah...
she'll know it's from me.
what do l put?
l dunno, tell me.
it has to come from you.
tell her... you want to be with her.
to caress her.
her body makes you think of a wave that comes and goes.
yeah, write that.
no, it's not great.
find an idea.
say what you think.
no, what you said was good.
l dunno.
tell her l like her a lot.
can l ask a favour?
that depends.
a favour for a favour.
sure.
you give me a massage...
what is it?
where's leila's room?
l'll show you.
have you always been a dwarf?
give me a break.
what next?
your body invades me...
the body when, what?
as soon as...
no, take the body out.
solitude invades me...
solitude would if you left me.
something like that... lnvadided?
no, would invade me.
solitude would invade me if you left me.
it means the same thing.
yeah, would hit me... something like that.
ok.
l dig her and...
don't write dig.
just tell her...
sorry about before.
sometimes it's hard.
yeah, sorry about before.
l want to cherish and hold you.
my only goal...
yeah...
my only goal... is to cherish you.
and to hold you tight.
lt's the same.
you're right.
to cherish and love you all my life.
yeah, to love you all...
no, just to love you.
to cherish and love you dearly is better.
yeah, dearly.
that's good.
your lipstick's cool.
pretty, isn't it?
where did you get it?
ln a chemist's.
hi, baby.
to tell me what?
and to give you this.
a letter?
yaya gave you it?
mr kebe...
what else?
l dunno.
to conclude, tell her... don't trust appearances.
what's inside me... l dunno...
yeah, go on.
don't trust appearances.
l'm not scum.
that you don't feel good.
yeah, ok.
don't trust appearances.
l really love you.
keep it simple.
sometimes it's really hard.
then l feel sad as l'd like to be nicer and happy with you.
l think l love you, yaya.
he can't write!
so what if it's the truth?
saying l love you to a girl!
the shame of it!
why can't he.
you're the bitch.
you're sensitive today.
it worked.
yeah, it did.
we're not staying here all night.
2trucks of cakes to sell.
don't forget the credit card.
no problem with nino.
you'll get it.
free.
there are 5bitches on heat.
where?
ln your dreams.
wait for us!
brother bestopaz!
know what l'd like right now?
a blow job in a church... from a millionaire.
you're dodgy.
what do you mean?
piss off.
get lost.
you're cracked.
ever had a millionaire?
once.
how did you do it?
not dressed like that.
can you sweep here?
yes, sir.
thanks, brother.
do a good job.
no messing about.
or l'll go to see your boss.
know what l'm capable of?
here.
thanks.
a little joint does you good.
l'd like to lay a sex bomb.
at least one girl.
not even a sex bomb.
even a dog.
l'd lay a slag.
you could get a sex bomb.
don't talk like that.
l'm ugly.
everyone's scared of me.
after forty they're too dressed up.
you check her out and offer her a drink.
l offer her a drink?
you don't need cash with a millionaire.
don't worry about that.
if she's old, make her think she's young.
if she's not too old, be polite.
make her forget she's old.
that's wild, man.
l want a piss.
piss in the bin.
if you're good, she'll take you with her.
r?
i!
come back quickly.
seen your bird?
do something.
ls she mad or something?
look at her.
let her be.
bullshit...
let me go!
gaby!
get up.
come on.
and the others?
they ran off.
where's louise?
dunno.
busy doing something.
no, something' happened.
sit down.
listen to me.
stay here.
l'll go and see.
don't move, ok?
stay opposite...
shit...
stay opposite him.
l wanted to.
lmpossible.
l'm sorry.
do you recognise me?
sorry for who, what?
you?
me?
sorry about what?
l came with gaby and thought it best he stayed with me.
l tried.
l promise.
did you wait?
you waited...
the metro's closing...
give me their names and we'll forget it.
put that down.
put it down.
do it!
let's see what mouss th?
phile says.
l had a daughter 3 weeks a go.
l was taken to a cash machine and threatened with a knife.
he has identified you.
you did it.
calm down!
richard, andr?
control her!
are you crazy?
calm down.
control her.
where's gaby?
you won't be seeing him soon.
she's nuts, hysterical take her away.
she's out of my responsibility.
l don't believe it.
can l sit here?
of course.
sit down.
l've lost my sister.
you always lose someone.
it's as if she was my heart... l adore her.
why are you here?
because l like the metro.
l meet interest inpeople.
you see?
can we spend the evening together?
of course.
we'll eat couscous.
seeing it's as much as you like.
would you like mussels too?
yes.
do you like them?
l've never tried.
never tried?
with rye bread... salted butter.
it's delicious.
you seem an intelligent boy.
you should go to school.
you really should.
school's no good.
you don't like it?
you'll regret it when you're grown up.
what's going on?
you get an education at school.
still here, yvette?
enough of that.
having a chat?
what's all this?
l'm waiting for my mum.
she's at the ticket office.
she left you here?
she's coming back.
there's a long queue.
are you having me on?
no.
are you lost?
no.
you're coming with me.
little lost child...
are you mad?
calm down.
l'll take you home.
come here!
where are you going?
don't be afraid.
go to hell!
louise!
hi, guys.
l was with my friend.
we went to a restaurant.
what did you eat?
l had mussels.
shut up.
you shut up.
shut it!
wanker.
no way.
shut it!
that's not nice.
sit down, young lady.
what's your name?
louise.
and your surname?
it's not important.
tell me about it.
l met a strange man.
and who is he?
a tramp in the metro.
about the attack.
l think he's jealous.
because he's going to die.
he hates me.
don't you believe me?
are you afraid of dying?
life's complicated.
what's complicate for you?
l made him a promise.
there's r?
i too.
l think l love him.
it's a fresh story.
but l've already got a boyfriend.
carry on.
l'm not telling you that.
you must be dreaming?
or not enough.
if there was a window, we'd hear the birds.
do you like birds?
we're here about you, not me.
tell me about yourself.
l like birds in the city.
it's like the country.
about the attack... l don't know you.
it's no use with you.
you're a wall with ears and a pen.
it bothers me to talk to you.
l prefer talking to gaby.
at least we laugh.
l have to be going.
you don't need me.
gaby doesn't like to be alone.
come back.
you can't leave.
yes l can.
l open the door and l'm free.
you're shut up in here all day.
l couldn't be.
ask him if he's in love and tell him he's cute.
no.
go on.
all right.
thanks.
my friend thinks you're cute.
which one?
the blond.
she's not great.
where did you buy your hat?
l stole it.
with a bomb alert.
well?
he doesn't think you're great.
ask him his address.
who's that geezer?
hang on, guys.
let's go.
ask him his age.
nine and a half.
just got here and already pissing about.
careful, he's a don juan.
what's your name?
gaby.
what did you do to be here?
got nicked.
you got nicked?
what can you do?
everything.
l did a bomb alert.
a bomb alert?
he did a bomb alert!
it's like prison here.
thieves get stolen off here.
watch your stuff.
it's the survival of the fittest.
get respected, you'll be all right.
l know you don't like your mum.
but never insult her.
mum's are sacred.
stop!
respect the food.
that's enough!
what's got into you?
before we start, l'll introduce a new classmate.
gabriel.
he'll sit next to gregory.
lend him what he needs for the lesson.
l want to know who started the scene in the cantine.
him!
lt wasn't me.
stop lying!
sit down.
the teacher's a hooker!
get out!
bitch!
it's you.
aren't you working?
l brought you your favourite biscuits.
l'm not hungry.
what did l do?
why didn't you tell me?
everything fine.
you're on form?
you losing it a bit.
it's to counteract the tranquillisers.
l don't grass.
they'll finally let me out.
why did they call you?
no respect.
l'm a waster.
didn't look after you.
that's not true.
you're the best dad.
my girlfriend love you.
don't be sad.
l prefer you stick to your work.
you're so funny...
my characters are crap.
unreal.
l'm... a good-for-nothing.
what can l do for you?
dunno.
find out about gaby.
the kid you were looking after?
he's in a home in noisy.
a home?
yes.
the inspector told me.
remember the boys who were with me?
do you hear that?
yes.
they love me.
you think so?
they told me.
and you?
l love them.
and you too.
time to leave.
she has to rest.
l'm not tired.
try to sleep.
right...
see you tomorrow?
look, l thought of you.
kiss better than that.
it's the necklace.
l've been dying for this.
me too.
l'll put it on later.
you kiss better than mouss.
that's no compliment.
we get out here.
shut it!
l'm lost.
shut it!
stop.
let's go.
l hate those wankers.
all right?
hi, remifasolasido?
any news of louise?
none.
you didn't hang about.
no good at letters.
l was stoned.
good excuse!
l'm romantic when l smoke.
use a chilum with her?
each to their own.
you can keep louise.
give me a break.
got any more like that?
didn't know about your supermarket.
you hit the shopping centre.
get going.
she's cool.
she listens to me.
no l don't.
he's doing my head in.
shut up!
what jerk?
hit him.
fucking stop it.
let him go.
come on.
who are you?
l'm looking for a boy.
gaby.
the new boy.
l spoke to him.
that's nice.
where is he?
with the boys.
it's forbidden.
can you show me?
l've a surprise for him.
ok, but don't make any noise.
gaby...
all right?
l knew you'd come.
where've you been?
l was with the cops.
nothing bad.
me too.
you know what?
l was the youngest.
what's going on?
l'm leaving.
all jerks here.
bye.
what's she doing here?
she's kind.
she showed me the way.
bye.
less noise.
to celebrate, we can have a party with remifasola, yoyo and the gang.
then go to the seaside.
the seaside?
l've never been.
let's go now.
what's up?
can l come?
why did you take the piss out of me?
it wasn't me.
spit and swear.
l swear.
she can come.
ok.
get your stuff.
quick.
hurry up.
where are you going?
to the seaside.
his friends are show-offs.
but she's nice.
l've a present for you.
my jacket.
look in the pocket.
this one?
the left one.
pretty, hey?
really!
know where l nicked it?
yeah.
we can collect them.
nick them off all rolls royces.
come on!
will you be my sister?
if you like.
we'll say a fairy brought us but we don't have parents.
we'll be free to do what we like.
seen my dad?
why?
l don't know him.
so you lied?
sometimes you have to.
it sorts out the truth.
are you angry?
no.
how did you find me?
by chance.
it's funny like that.
l've been looking for you.
l thought you'd gone.
we wouldn't do that.
that'd be horrible.
what's your name?
johanna.
cute.
stop it.
let's go.
come on.
l'd like a sandwich.
22francs...
that's only 3francs.
it's all l've got.
sorry, nothing for that price.
too bad.
here.
have this.
thanks.
l've no straws.
thanks.
goodbye.
the train's leaving.
do we buy tickets?
got any money?
11francs 50.
that's not enough.
we need billions.
what do we do?
easy.
we'll hide in the toilets or under the seats.
you're small enough.
no smaller than you.
l mean the seats.
it's best to be small.
eat it later.
why not now?
ok.
ok?
why did you kiss me?
because...
she wanted to.
don't you like it?
l'm not used to it.
they look unhappy about going to the seaside.
no smiles.
a big doctor said people who smile too much get dirty teeth from pollution.
so they stopped.
really?
l need to talk to you.
call me here if you like.
l'll join you very soon.
0142883992...
can l trust you?
take care of her.
she's small...
no problem.
you can trust me.
go on.
excuse me.
l'm sorry.
nice of you to come.
seen leila?
no.
and yaya?
news.
have a seat with friends.
come on.
cut it out.
what's new?
stop it!
aren't l attractive?
stop it!
hey, tell me...
cut it out.
keep out of it.
hello.
been crying?
jerk.
she's run away.
they made her mad.
who?
the devils.
the what?
the devils.
the only photo l've got.
special like a wanted photo.
already seen it:
can l keep it?
thanks.
it's my fault.
she believed all my nice stories.
but why lie to her?
so she can dream on.
what's the harm?
she was afraid of dying.
understand?
l understand.
deep down, l feel very sad.
since her mother died... l'm sorry.
she said she loved you.
what about you?
got any spare change?
leave her alone.
here's your money.
go on.
creature.
coming with me?
to warm you up.
you're cold.
look how you're dressed.
lace and all that shit.
come with me.
why are you like that?
stay with me.
leave her alone.
come back, creature.
hello, l'm jean-claude, l'm homeless.
do you have a coin to help me out?
miss, got a coin?
sorry, l'm broke.
hello.
may l see your id?
where's your id?
you playing the fool?
your ld.
you're not entitled to ask for id.
your guards, that's all.
tramps know the law.
l'm not a tramp.
you're not?
ld and shut up.
we'll take you away.
shut the fuck up.
read your contract.
you've got a contract.
you're not entitled...
arabs know the law now.
what's the connection?
shut it, l said!
your job is...
walk.
l'm not talking to you.
got a lover?
no, and you?
got a lover?
a boyfriend.
a boyfriend?
do you love me?
are you in love?
a bit.
l'm totally in love.
there are toilets for that.
l don't know where.
finished?
lsn't this luxury?
sure...
aren't you happy?
yes.
you're in heaven here.
you have to be dead first.
not necessarily.
for me, it's as if l was dead.
more than dead.
l love the sea.
even if l've never seen it.
it's all thanks to louise.
will she come?
yeah.
we'll call tonight.
great.
we're going to have fun with this lot.
why do you love me?
for nothing.
what, for nothing?
ls this nothing?
the sand, the beach, your wish come true.
and it's nothing?
tell me l'm dreaming.
subtitles:
r. j. mccarthy
processed by c.m.c.
paris.
__file_terminal__
in this, the first of an annual event... the bbc natural history unit... will push back the frontiers of wildlife filming.
in this first programme... by combining the most up-to-date filming techniques... with the most recent scientific knowledge... we will reveal something of the life... of one of the least known and most awe-inspiring creatures in the ocean.
you may feel you already know something of this animal... because replicas of it have been the focus of several cinema films.
but the real living animal has only been seldom glimpsed... and it's only been filmed from inside the protection of underwater cages.
in this film we're going to venture beyond those cages... to reveal something of the life of the great white shark.
the animal glides dreamlike through its watery world... and into our subconscious.
it's one of the last great predators to roam free on the planet... a creature of fearful symmetry.
this is the great white shark of myth and legend.
no carnivore in the sea or on land... has the power to strike such deep terror in our souls.
yet the white shark is not a lone, blood-thirsty killer... but a selective and skilful hunter with a complex social life.
we are about to follow the shark into its own element, the open ocean... to reveal its natural behaviour as never before captured on film.
the great white shark's range extends through all the world's seas... but it's often found in cool, temperate waters... near its favourite feeding grounds.
this is the cape coast at the southernmost tip of south africa... the convergence of two great oceans, the indian and the atlantic.
known to early navigators as the "cape of storms"... this rugged coastline is dotted... with the skeletal hulls of shipwrecked vessels.
the cape coast swarms with wildlife.
among the most abundant and lively inhabitants are the cape fur seals.
it's early spring, and the seals are here to breed... on the many small islands along the coast.
in a channel protected from the outside surf... a large raft of seals congregates.
here in these sheltered waters occurs a primeval contest.
the destinies of the seal and the great white shark... have evolved together for millions of years... an intricate partnership of hunted and hunter.
like the lion and the antelope... the shark and the seal co-exist... in a relationship both harmonious and violent.
this small pup was lucky... possibly because the shark had already eaten its fill.
on dyer island the cape fur seals breed all at the same time... and produce such a large number of offspring... that many will escape the white shark.
but the shark is not the main agent of death for the seal.
disease, starvation, and other causes also take a heavy toll.
one of the most crucial lessons a pup must learn... is how to survive in the sea... and sometimes his first lesson catches him off guard.
suddenly the pup is surrounded by adults... in the middle of a large seal raft.
the seals keep tightly together close to the shoreline... and stay away from the open waters of the channel.
the raft is a highly effective system of communal defence... not unlike gazelles seeking protection from a cheetah... by grazing in a large herd.
but the inexperienced pup strays away from the safety of the raft.
the white shark is the largest predatory fish in the sea.
even at birth, it's 3 to 5 feet long.
these sharks hunting in the channel are 8 to 1 4 feet in length... and weigh hundreds of pounds.
amazingly, they are still juveniles.
these young sharks have a diverse diet... that includes fish, squid and even other sharks.
at this time of year there's no richer hunting ground... than dyer island.
these high school students from cape town... are developing a new attitude towards sharks... as a result of a special educational programme... sponsored by the white shark research unit.
the line has no hook... so the shark decides whether it stays around or not.
south africa was the first country in the world... to fully realise the importance of the white shark as a top predator... and the first to declare it a protected species.
but it wasn't always this way.
not long ago white sharks were hunted... like the big cats of africa, as trophies.
the only good shark, according to the prevailing attitude... was a dead shark.
to vanquish the most feared monster in the sea...
carcharodon carcharias, the jagged-tooth-one... was proof of masculinity.
the bigger the monster... the bigger the psychological kick from killing it.
during this period, the largest sharks were virtually fished out.
only when dead and without water to support its immense bulk... does the white shark look so grotesque.
the living white shark in its own natural element... is a different matter entirely.
a majestic creature of ideal hydrodynamic design... it glides through the sea with minimum effort... and perfect grace.
once worshipped by early cultures... the shark's form has become an archetypal image... of the raw primal power of nature.
today in south africa white sharks are still hunted... but not for lifeless trophies.
craig ferreria of the white shark research unit... assists scientists studying the white shark population along this coast.
with him is greg marshall of the national geographic society.
it's quite simple.
it's a widely used procedure... except we're not going to hook the shark.
we're going to wait for him to come and bang it in.
shark takes off, the tag will come loose... take the pole away and that'll be left in the animal.
now they wait for a shark to come to the bait.
the belief that white sharks attack anything resembling food... turns out to be a myth.
in reality the white shark is often suspicious and even timid.
craig's task is to lure the shark as close to the boat as possible... and plant the tag just below the dorsal fin.
coming back...
just get him.
each shark reacts differently to the bait.
while some are shy, others are very aggressive.
this pugnacious individual sneaks in and snatches the bait.
it's not willing to give it up without a tug of war.
alright, ok.
ok, ok.
pull him slowly, slowly.
hang on.
she's got a tag.
pull the boat away.
what number is it?
what is it, ad...?
looks like adi to me.
adi.
this shark was tagged a few weeks ago.
its return will provide valuable information... on its movement since last seen.
but most white sharks are tagged and are never seen again... confirming their nomadic habits.
here comes another shark.
this one has no tag.
nice and easy.
ok, here's your chance.
nice.
ok, beauty.
despite the taggings, we still don't know... how many sharks are out there or where they go.
to try to find out where they go...
greg marshall will attempt something never done before... attach a video camera called a "crittercam" to a white shark.
it's always nerve-wracking to make a deployment.
lots of things are possible.
it's an incredibly powerful animal.
as a result it can do damage to the camera if it wanted to.
we don't know enough about its behaviour.
in a couple of cases the shark came... and rammed against the boat.
the great white shark is the animal... that is in some way in our subconscious.
we know that this is an animal that could take us out.
we're curious, we're fascinated, we're terrified of that possibility.
i would rather face my terror and try to understand.
i want to know this beast.
if greg's unique camera works... it will allow us to travel into the white shark's world... for the very first time.
when the shark swam away i saw the camera take... and start to fly behind the animal as it's supposed to... and fly in the right orientation as she moved away.
it was very exciting, a great feeling.
and now we take an incredible ride.
the shark patrols just below the surface... then veers towards the bottom in a long, purposeful descent.
she spends most of her time near the surface or at the bottom... but not in between.
the high dorsal fin is surprisingly flexible... and, like the keel of a boat, serves to stabilise and prevent roll.
she reaches the bottom.
the greyish-black hide on her back provides excellent camouflage... as she cruises along the seafloor.
the crittercam can show us exactly where the shark likes to hunt... and when it makes an attack.
there, suddenly a fish appears.
the shark takes off after it.
the crittercam has a bumpy ride as she strikes out again.
here she's clearly fed, a piece of her meal dangles from her mouth.
we catch a glimpse of another white shark.
great whites may not be the lone rogues we once thought they were.
in the hunting channel at dyer island they appear to move in groups.
another shark passes by, and she veers towards it.
the crittercam may be revealing social interaction among the sharks.
the camera has a link that dissolves in seawater.
after two hours the camera should pop off.
but anything can happen.
the shark encounters another shark... and the camera is dislodged and floats to the surface.
the shark, ever curious, circles... and inspects the alien object that had hitched a ride on her back.
floating on the surface, crittercam emits a signal... so that greg marshall can find it and retrieve the valuable videotape.
it's got to be along this line.
ok.
i think that's it right there.
as a remote video... crittercam records images without human intrusion... and allows us to experience events that we wouldn't ordinarily see.
it may lead to a more complete understanding... of the great white's behaviour.
got it.
ok.
man!
pretty baby.
other new remote technology would reveal... the relationship of white shark and seals... is more fascinating and complicated than previously imagined.
back on dyer island, it's february... and there are no more young pups to make easy meals for the sharks.
the sharks must now hunt adult seals... and they are incredibly swift, agile and alert.
here the shark can't use stealth, a bolder strategy is called for.
it cruises in plain sight.
the seals respond by porpoising.
like birds mobbing an enemy or gazelles following a cheetah... the seals swim behind the shark.
why?
perhaps to keep watch on the enemy, distract it... or simply to discover whether it's hungry.
the trick is to avoid becoming a meal in the process.
the white shark's strategy in the game is to appear uninterested... but it's always looking for a straggler.
their behaviour resembles an old children's game:
what time is it, mr. wolf?
three o'clock.
what time is it now, mr. wolf?
four o'clock.
what time is it now, mr. wolf?
it's suppertime!
the mortally injured seal floats to the surface.
the shark returns immediately.
the vigorous side to side thrashing... powers the saw-edged teeth... and enables the shark to devour the carcass bite by bite.
here the shark has coped with an elaborate communal defence.
but in another ocean... the shark has to deal with a different defensive strategy.
the northern elephant seal keeps close to the bottom... using stealth to avoid becoming prey to a shark.
when he surfaces, he's most vulnerable to attack.
he's looking for a place to haul out... but this sea lion rock won't do.
the elephant seal is not yet mature... he's only two to three years old.
he's managed to survive the hazards of life at sea.
now he joins other young elephant seals... who migrate every autumn to these shores.
we're at the farallons... an isolated cluster of islands in the pacific ocean... 27 miles off the coast of san francisco, california.
at this time of the year the white sharks are here too.
these are big ones, mature adults... they haven't been fished out here.
the sharks encircle the islands, hidden in the depths waiting.
the farallon islands are a national wildlife refuge... run by the u.s. fish and wildlife service.
off california, both seal and white shark are protected by law.
peter pyle, a biologist for the point reyes bird observatory... manages this refuge.
our study is unique in that we don't bait.
we don't put any blood or bait in the water.
therefore, everything we see on the shark... is what they're doing on their own in a natural setting.
i've probably seen a couple of hundred shark attacks by now.
shark attack off indian head, large pool of blood.
are you there?
yes.
indian head?
looks pretty good.
are you ready?
i'll be in the boat in a few minutes.
karen, are you there?
yes.
i'll be there in a minute.
are you ready, pete?
yes.
is everything set here?
all set?
yes.
ok.
ready?
going up?
going up.
so where is it?
it's on the side, in the lee.
scot anderson is the principal white shark biologist here.
he and peter race to arrive before the attack is over.
thanks karen.
it still looks like we got a floater, off indian head.
better get out there quick.
we'll be there in a minute.
what's the direction?
ok, i got the birds now, we're on it.
the sea is stained bright crimson... with oxygen-rich elephant seal blood.
the seal was killed in a massive first hit.
for some reason the shark has vanished... but it'll be back.
the shark is immense, the size of a mini-bus.
it dwarfs the 1 4-foot boat.
the kill provides food for others.
a ravenous petrel shares the feast.
this is a 400 pound seal, and it takes a while to finish it.
the shark consumes its prey methodically, piece by piece.
powerful tail beats... assist the sawing action of the two-tonne shark.
scot and peter try to keep up with the shark... to observe the details of the feeding process.
they must move as close as possible... without actually getting in the shark's way.
she's going to hit us.
where?
i can't see...
she's coming to hit us.
give her room, this is a big shark.
go in peter, she's about take it.
pretty wild, that was great!
now, there are two great whites circling below.
in the only study of white sharks in their natural, undisturbed state...
scot and peter take photographs of each shark involved in the kill.
she's underneath you.
that's a big one isn't it?
she's eighteen.
the sharks are here for the food... but are interested in anything on the surface.
they often bump the researchers' boat or mouth the motor.
whether from hunger, aggression, or simple curiosity, no one knows.
previously it was thought that there is only one shark at each carcass.
but we've since discovered there are more;
from three to five sharks arrive to investigate the kill.
there is no feeding frenzy... the carcass is approached in a cautious and controlled manner.
access to the food may be determined... by a series of visual displays and postures.
the white shark has a body language of its own... which we're only beginning to recognise.
two sharks swim side by side.
with the pectoral fins held down, mouth slightly agape... the sharks move closer to each other... until one gives way.
size seems to be the determining factor in dominance.
the larger sharks control the scene.
a shark approaches the carcass hunched in full display posture.
a larger shark rises up from below.
the first one arches its body and quickly gives way.
the bigger shark has established its right to feed first.
now, the feeding is finally over... and the sharks go back down to resume stalking.
the countershading of their hide, dark above, light below... makes them almost impossible to spot from above.
the shark may spend from two weeks to a month stalking... waiting for the opportunity that makes it worthwhile... to return each year to the same hunting ground.
the shark's strategy is to cruise along the bottom... watching for silhouettes above.
sea lions in a group are difficult to target and catch.
the shark prefers a single target.
scot anderson studies the sharks... in the same way as whales have been studied.
he attempts to get photos to identify individuals.
first lures the shark up... using a shape that resembles an elephant seal.
a surfboard seems to work as well as anything.
this is what scot is after:
photos of the dorsal fin and tail.
these are the kind of bites that we see on objects that we put out... a surfboard in this case.
and you can see the upper teeth lay down a crescent shaped bite... and they cut away flesh and take away a piece of the animal... whereas the bottom teeth are much sharper in a point... and actually pin the prey.
so the two sets of jaws working together... are very effective at removing large pieces of flesh.
you can see here each set of teeth.
the shark's actually missing one tooth here.
they can bite clear through something like this... but probably, when they get it in their mouth they sense it's not... a seal or sea-lion which they're used to eating.
it's much harder and they probably let go as soon as they feel it.
this is just a shark feeling the board.
the next challenge for scot involves getting photos of the entire shark.
the video board has a video camera in a housing... that's durable enough to withstand an attack... and also remain floating.
scot's decoy works.
these were the first films of great whites underwater in california.
only rarely do they actually attack the surfboard.
this inquisitive shark uses its potentially lethal jaws... to gently explore the surfboard.
scars and differing coloration... are clearly visible on these close views.
scot will use these views... to assist him in identifying individual sharks.
the scars on the bodies of the farallon sharks... provide more clues to their social rituals.
the postures and displays used to avoid direct combat... do not always prevent contact.
these big female sharks... have what appear to be combat or mating scars.
white sharks have never been observed mating... but it's likely their sexual behaviour... is turbulent, to say the least.
one big question is:
are the same sharks coming back each year?
everybody thought the sharks out here... were the same sharks, but nobody had any evidence.
it's different, i went through this.
exactly, it is different.
it's either on the other side, or it's further forward...
scot and peter sift through the available evidence... to attempt to catalogue all the individual great whites... that come to the farallons each autumn.
videos, stills, and sightings are all examined.
some suggest that hunting seals and sea lions... can be dangerous for the shark.
it could be from a seal or sea lion.
it doesn't look like a shark bite.
four teeth...
2 on the bottom and 2 on the top... which would be the two main canines.
over seven years of study, up to 40 individuals have been identified.
the researchers now know some of these returning sharks well... and have even become fond of them.
one of these is a massive, 18-footer named "stumpy"... so-called because the tip of her tail is missing.
we don't know where stumpy is during most of the year... but we know she shows up every autumn at the farallons.
what's more, she appears to come to the same spot to hunt.
how do you know stumpy is here?
you set the board out, and she lets you know.
this is how a great white kills an elephant seal in the first hit.
in one precise torpedo-like blow... the shark hits the prey from below.
the impact of the first lightning strike... may incapacitate the seal.
this strategy saves energy... and may minimise the risk of injury to the shark.
in the farallons... no shark is more successful at this strategy than stumpy.
she's the only animal we've recognised... taking three different seals in one year.
that's amazing when you think it's been calculated... one seal should last a shark up to 3 months.
she must be building up a lot of fat.
we suppose that's because she goes down and breeds... and probably doesn't eat much during the time she's giving birth.
great white sharks are the ultimate predators.
highly complex and adaptive... they vary their strategies to suit different situations... and to outwit exceptionally agile prey.
of all the great predators on the planet... white sharks are the only ones that cannot be caged or tamed.
as images of fierce uncontrolled nature... they are imprinted indelibly upon our collective consciousness.
jaws" and a lot of other movies instilled this belief in humans... that white sharks were killing machines... that wanted to jump into boats or grab humans and eat them.
we've learned that this is really not the case at all.
they're primarily interested in elephant seals.
as the animal behind the myth is revealed... the great white shark remains no less formidable as a predator.
its fearful symmetry is not diminished.
perhaps we need to know that it still survives out there.
like the tiger in the forests of the night... the white shark is the essence of wildness.
what time is it now, mr. wolf?
__file_terminal__
'welcome, family, fellow faculty members and friends.'
'thank you for joining us today in the celebration of... ' '... the graduating class of 2002.'
'i proudly can say each student standing in front of me... ' '... has not only worked hard, but has worked honestly... ' '... in graduating today.'
'i only hope you can continue to carry out this style of working... ' '... not only in your career, but for the rest of your lives.'
'graduation is also a time to look... ' '... at what the future has in store for each of us.'
'it is a very serious time.
a time to take a look at... '
pal, there's graduation day.
teacher's day.
mother's day.
father's day.
rose day.
valentines day.
when will there be a sex day?
don't know about the sex day.
but there will a gpl day for sure.
and that day all you lustful people will get a kick up your back side.
it's a case of sour grapes.
right, moron.
i am nervous here.
whether i should propose to anjali or not.
and the two of you are fighting over days?
look, love and all is just meant for killing time.
i believe in just having a good time and moving on.
you'll never be able to say i love you if you listen to rubbish like this.
listen to me.
go right now and open your heart to her.
open whatever you want.
except the heart.
don't do this stupidity.
he does our share of it.
so why should you?
just chill, friends.
don't mess my brain up.
i'll do whatever i need to.
go and get cozy with your girls.
'2002 as graduates.'
congratulations.
good luck, brother.
good, brother.
yes.
say something nice for once.
that is what i am saying.
say something nice for once.
you know what?
just off.
you know what?
just off.
'rajveer and aarav.'
'their friendship is like that of jai and veeru.'
'no.
no.
tom and jerry.'
'jai and veeru.' 'tom and jerry.
'jai... ' 'actually, nobody knows.'
'except one.'
'nikhil.'
anjali, i have been trying to woo you ever since i was a kid.
i can't live without you.
i am crazy for you.
i love you.
anjali. - 'this is nikhil's rotten old love story.'
what did you just say?
you love me?
no.
i guess it was a mistake.
stupid.
you took so long to say this.
'some people do it before marriage.'
'and some after marriage.'
'i mean love.'
'as in aarav.'
will you marry me?
what?
yes.
marry me.
are you out of your head?
marry me?
i thought you wanted to kiss me.
i thought you wanted to...
'and the result is.'
i am leaving you.
no, baby.
bye.
just leave me.
please don't leave me.
bugsy, don't leave me.
i'll be making up.
'and he does it before marriage.'
'but doesn't marry.'
what are your plans after this?
what do you mean?
are you asking me for marriage?
are you out of your mind?
marriage and me?
i was asking what your plans are after graduation.
this is the new brand ambassador of lsd.
come on.
you can do it.
come on.
yes.
come on.
friends, friends.
this is the real man.
he has agreed to our seven conditions before getting married.
that's why dheeraj is our risk taker.
he is a risk taker for sure.
he is getting married at age 22.
he'll be the father of two kids when he is 25.
all the important parts of the body will stop working when he is 30.
what will be his gifts?
diabetes and blood pressure.
pension plan at 35.
old age at 40.
he'll die at 45.
i don't agree.
you must marry if your love is true.
because marriage and kids...
yes, my darling rakesh.
rajveer, market is up.
shall we buy shares of reliance?
sure.
okay.
buy 1000.
only 1000?
i suggest let's buy 1 lakh shares.
you've to take big risks to be a big man.
live in relationships...
all the best.
hello.
what are you thinking?
okay, i'll talk to you later.
okay.
friends.
i have an idea.
let's play a game.
game?
what game?
why don't you have a bet?
what bet?
let's contribute and buy reliance's shares.
after a few years, the one who doesn't get married will get all the shares and money.
what kind of a bet is this?
this is the bet.
idiots, think about it.
today the price of this share is rs.140.
1400 after a year.
1 lakh shares x1400.
what say, friends?
i am ready.
who else?
come on.
friends, i am ready for the bet.
because i am not going to get married either.
yes.
son, i'll be taking this money.
we shall see, rascal.
me too.
superb.
i am only going to win.
yes.
this means everyone is ready except one.
actually, even i am in.
look, son, i suggest don't bet on the money.
you just might be the first one to get married.
i don't think so.
i am unlucky.
when i propose to a girl, she runs away.
that's true.
i will come to know that all of you have got married.
i am the only one left.
so let me take the plunge.
i will earn money.
if not get a girl.
what say?
okay.
so, friends.
what say?
deal?
okay.
deal.
deal
that is cool.
anjali, what has nikhil said that has got you so frustrated.
then what do i do?
you know, sneha.
i have always had a dream that i get married out of india on a grand level.
there is a diamond ring in my finger.
i wear a dress designed by ravishankar jaiswal.
in fact, i had even chosen the wedding dress.
but whenever i talk about marriage nikhil comes up with an excuse.
seems like he is not interested in marriage.
anjali, nikhil is among those who are scared of committing to marriage.
you will have to break up with him in order to marry someone else.
break up?
yes, saket?
my dear.
how are you, pal?
i am doomed, pal.
ever since my father's death, nothing good has been happening to me.
listen, there has been an income tax raid at my boss's house.
it could be my turn any time.
i am sending my boss's rs.
5 crores to your house.
please manage.
5 crores?
yes.
sure.
send it here.
it is your own house.
take it back when you feel like.
i am a bit rushed now.
speak to you later.
bye.
see you.
bye.
rakesh, listen to me carefully.
tell me.
have to invest 5 crores urgently in the market.
and i want to double it urgently.
can you do it?
but where did you get so much money from?
p. chidambaram has given it to me.
said its the governments money.
is lying idle.
invest in stock market.
the country will benefit.
why are you getting so annoyed?
i will invest in satyam infotech.
and yes.
my commission will be double.
take whatever you want.
as if i have to give it from my pocket.
5 crores.
10 crores.
sex.
listen, nikhil.
i want to talk to you about something really important.
yes.
same here.
but you say first.
see, nikhil, we have known each other since childhood.
we like each other.
in fact, we love each other a lot too.
but the progress a relationship should make...
but i feel something different now.
i think i am done with relationships.
you are getting my point, right?
yes.
look, anjali, what happens is there comes a time in everyone's life when he gets bored of the daily routine.
even i want something new.
something more.
something more exciting.
you know.
i guess this is what i wanted to tell you.
we should start a new life.
correct.
and i have brought you here to this romantic place so that we end whatever we had between us and start something new.
you are right.
let us break up.
dude, why are you sitting here like the statue of liberty?
hey, anjali.
hi.
nice dress.
you were coming here.
you should've told me.
we would've come here together.
rajveer.
please.
go from here.
okay.
inconvenience regretted.
henceforth put the board of don't disturb on your table.
i will take a u turn.
okay.
hey, black forest.
rajveer.
please.
don't eat it.
i am not eating it.
look, you know very well.
rajveer.
i start drooling when i see cherry and cream.
raj...
rajveer.
there is a stone in the cake.
excuse me.
come here.
come on.
you're actually getting married.
nikhil, are you out of your mind?
rajveer, please just get the hell out of here.
right now.
okay.
relax.
relax, folks.
i am sorry.
childhood friends.
anjali, i don't know what you think about me.
i don't know whether you'll be able to live without me or not.
but i won't be able to live without you.
will you marry me?
yes.
finally.
hey...
what's up?
what is the occasion?
wearing pink today.
hey, brother.
how are you?
what are the two of you doing here?
we have come to mess up your life.
actually, there wasn't no entry put up outside.
so i came in.
yes.
as if the two of you need invitations to come or go?
no.
look, boss.
anjali is coming here today.
with her mother and father.
to meet my mother and father.
wow.
fantastic.
so i don't want my marriage broken because of the two of you.
so why don't you get the out of here then?
come on.
the door is that way.
thank you.
nikhil, you know.
you should always throw garbage out of the house.
throw him out.
why should i go?
hi, uncle.
i was always in favor of your marriage.
look, there will not be any tension because of me.
i can't say anything about the rest.
don't even think.
i am not going anywhere.
we are your friends.
your family.
how will the girl and her family feel when they come here?
none of your friends are here.
look, this is how it is.
you didn't listen to me.
i didn't.
you have a death wish.
good luck.
we will do our duties as your friends.
peacefully
peacefully.
the two of you.
do you know how big jerks the two of you are?
sorry.
i am sorry for what happened yesterday.
but, i swear.
we will be at our best behavior.
look, there won't be any problem because of us.
trust me.
let me see.
uncle...
folks.
please.
you will not come out of this room.
please.
may we receive them?
please.
a little help.
please, brother.
please.
thank you.
every time.
thanks to you.
oh my god!
hi.
how are you, son?
how are you, mom?
fine, thank you.
hi, sir.
how are you, man?
forget it, let's eat it.
you should at least have manners that you shouldn't eat before the guests.
so, where should we start from?
what?
look, kids need to marry.
you know.
and why are you eating like a beggar?
there's a small problem.
you know anjali, her grandma.
she's going to die.
oh, god.
dad.
excuse me.
you are saying that for my mother.
sorry, mom.
sorry, dear.
sorry, mother-in-law.
this fork and spoon isn't made to stare at.
they are made for eating.
idiot.
this is how you eat?
with a fork and spoon, without opening your mouth wide and without making a sound.
whether i use my hands, or my mouth to eat why does it concern you?
what is your problem?
listen, you dog.
don't badmouth me.
then what should i do, rascal?
rajveer, shut your mouth or else...
or else what?
what will you do?
hit me.
why the...
we have very little time.
and i want this marriage to get over with at jet speed.
you know.
two weeks.
big resort.
dubai.
take that.
rajveer, what have you done?
you two have ruined the food.
sorry.
rascal.
what's going on?
what is happening here?
what are you boys doing?
what the...
oh, no.
i am sorry for this.
they injured my father's head, nikhil.
you won't invite your friends to our marriage.
and if they attend the marriage then i won't go ahead with it.
what are you saying?
they are my best friends.
i know they are slightly mischievous.
they are slightly stupid as well.
but that doesn't mean that you will punish them so severely.
it's my marriage.
stupid?
they are scoundrels.
nikhil.
we only get married once.
and i want our marriage to be perfect.
listen, baby.
just calm down.
i promise you i am going to give you a perfect wedding, okay.
how?
everything's going wrong.
my marriage dress isn't ready yet.
the designer from whom i want to stitch my dress is busy making a dress for a famous movie actress's wedding.
he completely refused to make a dress for me.
so what's the problem?
ask some other designer to make your dress.
no, dear.
no one can make a dress like jaiswal.
he's just wonderful.
and if he doesn't design my dress then i won't get married.
what?
what's the problem?
two minutes ago my friends were a problem for you.
and now this wedding dress is coming between us.
this is so ridiculous.
i don't want to hear anything.
but what is your problem.
no wedding dress, no marriage.
but that's...
invite aarav, no marriage.
this is madness.
invite rajveer, and no marriage.
you have lost your mind.
that's it.
i am done.
okay, i am done too.
the witch.
even i don't want to marry you.
anjali has clearly refused that you two cannot attend the wedding.
and being a henpecked husband you said yes.
bravo.
but, i am your wedding planner.
i mean, planning your wedding, the decorations is my business, friendship aside.
so, i think i can come.
you cannot come.
sorry.
fine.
i am leaving.
bye.
okay.
yes.
you didn't leave.
he doesn't even try to stop me.
yes.
what a filthy man.
seriously.
just leave, don't stop.
selfish rascal.
you forgot everything, didn't you?
in your childhood, when girls wouldn't even look at you that's when i taught you how to talk to girls.
i taught you to play doctor with girls.
i even taught you how to propose to girls.
i got you your first kiss.
i bought you your first condom.
back then you used to say thank you, thank you.
but today i...
listen, listen.
i remember everything.
no need to remind me, understand.
and if you're that good a friend then get me that jaiswal's wedding dress.
can you two do it?
what is this?
aarav, where have you brought us?
that ravi shankar jaiswal.
yes.
he's coming here to attend a party function.
what are you saying?
that is why we are here.
and you please stay quiet.
get lost.
look, we have made it until here.
please don't create any problem, okay.
please.
surprising.
i am helping you and you are scolding me.
he is right.
you want a wedding dress for anjali, don't you?
we will get it for you.
not we, me.
and please don't say anything here because only sophisticated, cultured and well-mannered people come to this place.
you mean gay.
not all are gay, some are sophisticated like me.
that means gay.
ask him to shut up or i will shut him up.
i will keep my mouth shut.
and anyway, what is my point of speaking in such a place.
you say it.
here.
come on.
wait.
so, mister.
what is the problem?
you cannot go in until you don't wear this superman dress.
we want to walk in and not fly.
come on.
wear it once and then you will see what flies inside.
get lost.
he's crazy.
come on, let's go.
we'll meet him some other day.
it concerns my marriage.
wear it.
red underwear?
pint t-shirt.
it will look nice on us.
sophisticated.
cultured.
well-mannered.
this is crazy.
today we had to dress like superman for his marriage god knows what tomorrow.
do you have a problem?
then go outside.
hey, take him outside.
shut up, you two.
the underwear's so tight and you two are uttering nonsense.
he was such a...
i was so fed up, you know.
to hell.
excuse me.
where can i find mr. jaiswal?
forget about jaiswal, give us tequila shots.
three.
yes, get it.
hi, handsome.
excuse me.
what are you smiling about?
handsome.
look.
do not touch.
fly.
what is it?
what?
you ask.
fly.
ask.
so, superman.
can we fly?
of course.
wherever he goes, he flies there.
look, super... woman, man.
whatever.
i cannot even address him properly.
look, don't touch me.
don't misbehave.
stay away.
otherwise i will kick you so hard on your back that i will turn you into a super-duper bumper.
how dare you?
dudes.
everyone come here.
come here.
don't think we are weak.
even we can fight.
really?
what's your problem?
tell us.
just leave.
boss.
i am requesting you.
please let us meet mr. jaiswal.
i want him to make a wedding dress for my would-be wife.
oh, well.
that's not possible.
and even if it had been possible then we wouldn't have told you.
because your friend sucks.
look, i am requesting you.
if he doesn't make the wedding dress then my wedding will be called off.
okay, we will.
but one condition.
let's have a dance competition.
let's see if you all are the best.
if you are the best then you have a meeting with ravi shankar jaiswal.
and if you turn out to be the worst, then...
then?
then.
nobody knows.
we are the supermen.
and we want to fly.
want to fly, high, high.
high, high, high.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
we own the nights, and also the days.
it's an ambience filled with excitement.
we will create a ruckus.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
we are the supermen.
and we want to fly.
want to fly, high, high.
high, high, high.
live this moment.
don't care a darn no matter how much the world troubles you.
breathe deeply in my arms.
don't let distances crop up.
no matter what the world says, come on.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
let us sit on your lap and tell us lullabies.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
we are the supermen.
and we want to fly.
want to fly, high, high.
high, high, high.
superb.
great.
please.
go back.
superb.
fantastic.
mind-blowing, boys.
you rocked my party.
my party was getting so boring.
who is he?
you just set my party on fire.
there's fire raging everywhere.
i am so happy.
who is he?
he is ravi shankar jaiswal, you naughty boy.
i see.
sorry, we got a little too carried away.
no worries, boys.
you're bound to have such fun at this age.
and that's exactly what we all did as well.
nikhil.
don't worry about your fiancé's wedding dress.
i am going to do it.
and it will be a wedding dress from my side.
yes.
thank you so much, aarav.
anytime.
thank you.
thank you so much.
i really want you guys to be a part of my wedding.
of course.
excuse me.
even i helped in getting the dress.
i need a hug too.
i hugged her genuinely.
i am doing it genuinely as well.
she's your future sister-in-law.
wasn't she yours?
of course.
guys, guys.
sneha.
sneha's come, nikhil.
sneha.
come, let's go.
let's go, let's go.
guys, i will see you later.
sneha?
what a girl?
sexy.
what a beauty.
i am serious.
i am serious too.
by that i meant marriage.
done.
once i get over with the honeymoon then you can marry her.
okay.
who do you think you are?
i will win over this girl.
by hook or by crook.
place a bet if you want.
coward.
done.
good luck.
bro.
good luck, bro.
we are meeting after a year.
i missed you so much.
you know what, i also missed you.
forget that.
you say that you missed me.
but you completely forgot me after going to the us.
two doors in the same bathroom.
oh, no.
were you too busy?
thank god i came here only to wash my hands.
what did you get so many gifts for?
this is for you and...
nikhil.
hello.
we aren't married yet.
if i forget then later you will say that i didn't give a gift.
where is your boyfriend?
he was supposed to come with you, wasn't he?
he didn't come.
why?
break up.
what?
oh my, god.
you broke up with him as well?
yes.
is there a big importance of break up in your life?
first you advised me on the phone and you broke up yourself.
you know what, babe.
it's not like that.
we hadn't even dated for six days when he proposed to me for marriage.
i was like are you mad.
you should have seen him.
side-parting, oily hair.
always suited-booted.
no style, nothing.
he would talk so mannerly it seemed like he was misbehaving.
no abusing, or foul-mouthing.
dude, i am your girlfriend.
why are you being so formal?
that was fine.
i would have managed.
but...
but what?
no party, no flirting, no fun, no kissing, no...
i was like, look, better get lost.
wow, great.
great thoughts, madam.
listen, if its true love then you should get married.
understand.
i believe in love.
i want to get married.
but not like this.
let me enjoy life first.
you are a...
you?
you haven't left yet.
no.
i...
what?
get it.
what?
get me that girl, please.
what?
you think i am a pimp.
then be one.
how does it matter?
can't you do this much for your friend?
look.
she is anjali's best friend.
she is like a sister.
but she isn't her sister, is she?
and i am not her brother either.
look.
she is not your type of girl and neither are you her type.
she likes well-cultured, well-mannered boys.
nonsense.
understand.
and anyway, i don't want you to pull such tricks in my marriage.
forget that girl, forget this house, and get going.
a small introduction.
small.
i will handle the rest.
please.
intro.
you can do that.
come on.
thank you.
listen.
just say good things.
yes.
i will tell her about all your good things.
i will tell her how many girls you made pregnant.
how many you have seduced.
and how many illegitimate children you have.
enough.
i will tell her everything.
i asked you to say good things and not be honest.
you are going to rape me in front of her.
otherwise you will do her.
look, she's a nice and sweet girl.
she needs a simple and sober guy.
not someone like you.
understand.
simple and sober.
how is that possible?
let my heart keep singing.
no, no, no.
dev sir is too evergreen for me.
hello.
i don't know anything about other things except for my own subject.
amol sir.
he's too simple.
allow me to leave.
simple.
dharampur, dharampur, dharampur.
oh, god.
mangalore, bangalore, mangalore, bangalore.
ashok kumar.
mandva, khandva.
it will take my entire lifetime.
talegaon.
malegaon.
not that long.
'you should at least know that... ' '... you shouldn't eat before the guests.'
no way.
i will rather die but...
but...
come back.
'this fork and spoon isn't made to stare at.'
'they are made for eating.'
now, he will make my plan successful.
simple... and sober.
oh, my.
he will ask for money.
good afternoon.
hello.
what is this?
your friends always come on time and ruin everything.
today, by not coming on time are they planning to ruin our wedding?
you should be happy.
pray that they don't come.
we will at least be able to get married.
hey, sex.
hi.
would you be my baby?
you?
yes, me.
what is this, boss?
why is your hair standing?
did you come on a bike?
whose clothes have you worn?
style, sex.
that's called style.
style?
okay.
where's the other joker?
hi, friends.
oh no.
why are you guys staring at me?
didn't you recognize me?
i am your dear friend rajveer.
you... you...
why has your hair gone flat?
what is this?
well...
hey, sunny.
sunny.
you... you...
come here.
take care.
come.
you take care.
'he is copying my style to woo sneha.'
poor guy.
'he doesn't know that sneha doesn't want a simpleton... ' '... but someone who is debauchee.'
off.
hey, hot-bun.
aarav.
nikhil's the best friend.
yeah.
sneha.
nice to meet you.
we have just introduced ourselves.
we haven't met.
too fast.
and furious.
curious.
serious.
about you.
you are so funny, man.
cool.
i apologize but if you brother and sister are done with your display of affection then can i go inside?
no.
you cannot.
you are very rude.
i'll have to do something.
my foot.
ouch.
sit properly.
i'm sorry.
sorry.
i hope you didn't get hurt.
no, it's okay.
my name is rajveer.
hi.
sneha.
it's a pleasure to meet you.
same here.
but i don't feel so.
look, you...
we both are talking to each other.
yes.
i request you not to interfere while we are talking.
you...
condoms?
what?
disgusting.
aarav.
he is so foul-mouthed.
what is he saying?
stop it.
what?
it's okay.
you are going to dubai?
yes.
no.
she is going to london.
i am going to america.
and the flight we are catching is going to west indies.
why don't you meet a doctor?
aarav.
you have a problem of talking too much.
oh really?
what are you doing?
why are you troubling this poor soul?
keep quiet.
one second.
tell him.
yes.
i am going to dubai.
actually, i am going to attend anjali's wedding.
i am her very good friend.
you too are anjali's friend?
well... no.
i am...
nikhil's friend.
one of.
wow.
then we will have a lot of fun in the wedding.
oh yeah.
we will have a lot of fun.
yeah.
you, me and...
there are flowers blooming everywhere.
okay, guys.
it's time for the flight.
see you.
yeah.
see you soon.
bye.
i won't spare you.
you are messing with me?
i won't spare you, you scoundrel.
aarav has really done a great job with the wedding arrangements.
beautiful.
really.
ladies and gentlemen.
may i have your attention, please?
here he comes.
please.
listen, everybody.
today, my daughter anjali and nikhil are getting engaged.
whenever i see my daughter only one thought comes to my mind.
my daughter, she is brave like her father.
and whenever i see nikhil i feel...
that he is very simple and sober, like his father.
right?
uncle.
i can say just one thing when i look at anjali.
true and loyal friend.
and nikhil, cool and handsome.
i want to say something.
excuse me, please.
sure.
thank you.
nikhil, my friend, my buddy.
he is brave.
like father like son.
yeah.
and after marriage he will be a tamed pet.
meow.
right, sneha?
isn't it funny?
yeah?
and anjali?
oh, the beautiful anjali.
sexy mother's sexy daughter.
i want to eat you, baby.
yeah.
she is going to be his ringmaster.
the one in command.
when she will express her love it will look as if she is growling.
where had you gone?
why did you go there?
with whom did you go?
how much money did you spend?
isn't it?
isn't it, sneha?
oh yeah.
yeah.
we all told him not to get married.
this is a trap.
you will get trapped.
but he paid no heed.
now look, this fool got trapped.
now no matter what you do.
no matter how much cajoling you do, you will have to face the whip.
isn't it, sneha?
what happened?
why are all of you so quiet?
did you like it so much?
thank you.
what is this?
i too want to say something.
rajveer.
one is enough.
will you too...
well, i feel long speeches are very boring.
hence i want to say just two words.
husband and wife are like the two wheels of a chariot.
the chariot cannot move even if one wheel breaks.
but i know that my friend nikhil and anjali's relation will never break.
because their relationship is very pure.
very clean.
very true.
wow.
if he is sour, she is sweet.
if he is the sky, then she is the land.
if he is happiness, then she is sadness.
if he is the sun, she is the moon.
if he is fire, she is a fire cracker, sorry, water.
though they are different from each other but they are incomplete without each other.
that's it.
this is all i have to say.
wow.
cool.
whatever he said was nice.
i didn't understand what he said.
but his hindi is very nice.
thank you.
beautiful.
please.
i said whatever came to my heart.
that's it.
these were your two words?
no matter how many they were they were better than yours.
i couldn't understand whether you were uniting or separating them.
you know what?
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you make the world smile.
happiness lies in you.
whatever you say calms my heart down.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
by keeping you in my eyes, i come back from death.
i will be happy to give my life for you.
by keeping you in my eyes, i come back from death.
i will be happy to give my life for you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
two minutes.
where are you taking me?
two minutes.
now slowly open your eyes.
okay?
okay.
slowly.
how beautiful.
you like it?
yeah.
you made it?
yeah.
18 ½ hours.
for me?
is there anyone else here?
and yes, forget the waves, nothing can destroy it.
oh no.
come.
oh no.
did it have to rain now?
oh, god.
how did it start raining all of a sudden?
i know.
but, how romantic.
what timing.
right?
well, like in the old movies...
the hero and heroine are walking and all of a sudden it starts raining.
there is lightening and...
and the heroine runs towards the hero and gives him a tight hug.
and then they both realise, oh, god.
what did we do?
and then, both of them lose themselves into each other's eyes.
like this.
and then their lips inch closer.
and when the hero is about to his the heroine she runs away.
like this.
what timing, god.
one dirham is equal to rs.12.50.
yes, boss.
rs. 12.50.
i have earned it for my family.
sorry, boss.
not to build your body.
sorry, boss.
scoundrel.
sneha.
please wait.
where are you going?
sneha.
tell me something, rajveer.
why are you and aarav after me?
don't you have a girlfriend?
i do.
who?
me?
hey.
who is with me other than you in this dark night?
no one.
so you are mine, right?
okay.
so what can you do for me, that is your girlfriend?
do... do...
do...
what is this?
do...
a rhythm.
do, do, do, do.
a rhythm.
okay.
do, do, do, do.
sing along.
it's nice, but sing it in tune.
why are you singing like crazy...
i mean how are you singing?
in this way, we will never be in tune.
that is what i am trying to say.
if you sing like this, how will we be in tune?
look, please, make an attempt.
otherwise, how will there be love?
okay.
okay then.
i will sing for you.
you help me with the rhythm.
okay.
here we go.
you, me and this night.
it's something very simple.
the sky is sad.
because the moon is with me.
you, me and this night.
it's something very simple.
the sky is sad.
because the moon is with me.
my heart tells me...
i should commit a mistake.
if you touch me...
i will be fragrant.
you, me and this night.
you are a nice person.
but you hold a secret.
in this wet night...
i fear getting influenced by you.
you are a nice person.
but you hold a secret.
in this wet night...
i fear getting influenced by you.
you, me and this night.
we've been thinking for so long that what would be the seven conditions that will decide whether you are men yet or not.
what do you mean?
do you see that shop?
which one?
the toy shop.
will you ever grow up?
look besides the toy shop, the lingerie shop.
yes, so.
go in there, wear a bra, take a photo and show it to us.
go on.
have you lost your mind?
i...
i will wear a bra?
what will i say?
i want a bra.
you have lost your mind.
you forgot about the seven conditions, right?
this is one of the seven.
now you can go dance, sing, do whatever you want.
are you serious?
go on.
have you lost your mind?
you will get me killed some day.
what the...
excuse me, sir.
can i help you?
no.
no, no, thanks.
i am just checking out something.
oh no.
you.
dad.
what are you doing here?
i...
i came to see the trial room.
you came to see a lingerie trial room?
what are you doing here?
i want to see your original colours.
i want to see the type of guy my daughter is marrying.
open your shirt.
we may have a situation.
are you serious?
stop.
look at him.
guards.
catch him.
shut up, guys.
he's gay.
stop.
stop, guys.
stop.
yes, where are you?
everyone's looking for you.
mr. rajveer.
if you want to meet your friend again...
but who...
hey, so there you are.
by god, you're looking sexy.
and who are they?
hey, dude, what's up?
do you chew tobacco?
sorry.
buses, shops, houses.
stairs and trains.
on walls, do you spit red colour?
excuse, are you... talking to me.
everywhere in india wherever you see the colour red its because of me.
except for the red fort.
now even ladies spit red colour.
later they suffer... from paralysis of the face.
i gave people this style.
only for rs. 2.
pay rs. 2 and take this style.
what nonsense is he blabbering?
who is he?
out of all the people that die due to cancer in india half of them is caused due to chewing my tobacco.
so?
so, you have taken my money.
now think what will happen to you.
your friend saket.
his father's dead.
saket will die too.
i fed him so much tobacco that there's red colour left in his body, but only of the tobacco.
my eight crores.
will you return it after chewing the tobacco or before?
not you.
i will make him chew him.
you said that you will make ten out of five.
double.
i am only asking for eight.
two crores will be your brokerage.
fine, happy.
you mean we made profit.
we made profit.
then you will have to thank me.
i made profit for you, dude.
you invested my five crores, understand.
and i didn't even get five lakhs from it.
not even five lakhs.
look, uncle.
i took your money.
why have you kidnapped him?
if i kidnap you then who will pay me my money?
i apologise for whatever happened.
please.
don't apologise to me.
apologise to him, your friend.
it's not his mistake, uncle.
let him go.
he's getting married after seven days.
he won't.
pay me my money within seven days.
and if i don't get the money then i don't care whether your friend lives or dies.
and you can contact anyone you want.
any goons, don, police, minister, etcetera, etcetera.
anyone, anyone.
no one can get this marriage done, if i don't want to.
sorry.
beg, borrow, steal, rob a bank.
do whatever you want.
but return him his money.
i have a suggestion.
tell your father-in-law.
tell him i want dowry.
why do i feel that nikhil just slapped you?
you did, didn't you, nikhil?
yes, he did.
yes.
do you want as well?
come on.
here you go.
hey.
you asked for it and i did.
i won't get such an opportunity again.
stop dancing.
do you know what he has done?
what could he have done?
he must have misbehaved with some girl.
what else can he do?
changing the look doesn't change the person.
you are a lowly man and you will stay one.
and that's why sneha will...
will marry me.
this is nothing.
he has created a bigger mess.
no.
wait.
found it.
beat me more.
found it.
what did you find?
why are you laughing?
do you want to hit?
come on.
hit.
no.
beat me.
it's okay.
found it.
have you gone crazy?
what did you find?
found it.
he has gone crazy.
found it.
rajveer, leave.
rajveer, what are you doing?
what are you doing, rajveer?
sorry.
have you gone insane?
aarav was beating you badly.
and you were laughing crazily.
did you get a fit of laughing?
that's the game, boss.
today, he slapped me.
but when i will beat him, he won't even realize it.
beat?
whom?
what are you saying?
i don't understand anything.
look, we want eight crores.
aarav has 10-12 crores.
ask me how.
how?
reliance shares.
no matter how down the market is.
if we sell reliance shares, we will get at least 10-12 crores.
i will throw eight crores on gutka's face.
and we will keep four crores for ourselves.
aarav should just sign the contract.
amazing!
let's talk to him.
he is our friend.
he will help us.
come on.
are you mad?
are you crazy?
sit here.
what will you go and say?
sign for rajveer.
hearing my name he will get so infuriated that his body will tremble with rage.
he won't get infuriated.
talk to him.
he won't even look at the contract, leave alone sign it.
do one thing.
leave everything to me.
just trust me.
somehow convince aarav to get married.
married?
since childhood he couldn't entice a girl.
from where will you bring a bride for him?
look, listen to me.
don't use your brains.
please.
just trust me.
he will get married.
and we will get our freedom.
not red and yellow.
i want those beautiful white curtains.
you know, those white curtains with orchid flowers on it.
beautiful.
the same thing that we did during shilpa's wedding.
it will be done.
where should i put the candles?
where?
put it on some table.
fine.
i will do that.
everybody is talking like rajveer.
sir, the fitting is fine?
it's not too tight, is it?
it's not tight.
come on.
the marriage should take place.
it will be more than enough.
ranjeet.
yes, sir.
after sir's fitting take my measurements too.
fine, sir.
aarav.
yes.
listen, are you serious about sneha?
dead serious.
so propose to her.
i will get married soon.
everybody will return home.
she will go to us.
you will be in india.
yes.
what will you do here alone?
listen.
listen to me.
propose to her.
along with me you also get married.
you are saying this?
it took you 50 years to propose.
and you are telling me to marry in five minutes.
i will fix your marriage.
as it is, anjali told me sneha likes you.
not rajveer.
what are you saying?
yes.
really?
who doesn't like me?
hey, sex.
sex.
why are you staring at me?
finally, you have shown your true colors.
true colors?
excuse me.
this is my true color.
yes.
but you are copying me right now.
because he couldn't impress sneha.
get lost.
my formula is simple.
if i get the girl, i take her.
if i don't get her, somebody else will take her.
who will waste so much time for a girl?
and you.
i lost the bet that we had waged for sneha.
but you have not won.
and i won't let you win.
mister, i won't give up.
understood?
let's see.
sir, which light do you want?
night lights or db lights.
db?
db means dance bar.
my friend, it's not a dance bar.
it's a marriage.
come.
i will come with you.
otherwise you will convert the wedding dais into a dance bar.
right?
come.
i will tell you where to put up the lights.
listen.
he remembered that i have organized a bachelor party this evening.
on my behalf.
are you mad?
gutka king is after our lives.
and you want to party.
i am doing all this for gutka king's money.
bachelor party is just an excuse.
so that sneha thinks ill of me.
and aarav already doesn't think well of me.
shake it.
girl, you think you might be loving.
girl, you think you might be fun.
but let me say, girl, you are honey.
let me see you.
i am your daddy, girl.
oh, no.
i am your daddy, girl.
anjali.
anjali, calm down.
how?
if he makes one mistake, i can forgive him.
but they are competing.
as long as cheap friends like rajveer and aarav are in his life i won't marry him.
he will have to either leave his friends or me.
i am talking to father.
anjali.
relax.
don't make haste.
let's think of something.
fine?
i will bring water for you.
are you badly hurt?
no.
forget it.
listen, what are you doing here?
i want to tell you something.
i like your hair.
it's changed.
leave my hair.
okay.
i had called the strippers and the item girls
so?
since the time i have come here i didn't get time to do anything.
it's okay.
so?
what do you mean so?
i am really a playboy and...
sneha.
oh, god.
hi.
you had gone to fetch water, hadn't you?
yes.
are you taking a shower?
i thought i will freshen up.
at 2 o'clock in the night?
yes.
i was feeling a little tired.
come.
take a bath.
i am really stressed.
i need to talk to you.
take a bath.
i will stand here and talk to you.
will you take a bath fully clothed?
you know what, sneha?
you were right.
i don't think you should marry nikhil.
do you know?
i always felt nikhil is different from other boys.
but no.
he also turned out to be cheap like rajveer and aarav.
he shows interest in other girls while i am there.
you saw, didn't you, sneha?
nikhil was all over them.
it's true.
all boys are the same.
dog.
they see a girl and...
are you sister sneha?
no.
mantu...
what is this?
for whom is this flower?
for sister sneha.
brother aarav has given.
you go.
i'll handle this.
okay.
pal, is he proposing to sneha for sex or marriage?
orange flower?
he is a duffer.
i'll go talk to him.
'the fragrance of henna will not suffice you.'
'so i thought of sending the fragrance of flowers too.'
'with love.
aarav.'
yes, aarav.
you can do it.
confidence.
hey.
i really liked the flowers you sent.
really?
thanks.
flowers?
i had sent one...
i would've liked it just as much if you had sent just one.
really?
you're flirting, aren't you?
yes.
i like flirting with you.
i feel very special when you're with me.
just kidding.
mad.
shall we have food?
lunch.
shall we have lunch?
good idea.
actually, i am also really bored of having food in this hotel.
yes, i like variety.
you see.
come.
you like it?
yes.
look, no country should get water for free.
okay?
the cost of water must go up every day.
text me and tell me how much was the turnover of water in dubai and singapore.
go.
dude, want to talk to you.
what?
come on.
i'll just come.
what are you doing?
i was feeding her.
what are you doing like a sidekick?
what?
you were supposed to propose to her, right?
yes
so why have you brought all them for lunch?
she said we'll get bored if just the two of us have lunch.
that's why she called everyone one by one.
crazy.
when will you propose for marriage?
i will.
get off my back.
are you in a hurry?
you go propose to her.
go.
do two marriages.
go.
come on.
may i?
look, he doesn't have the guts.
eventually, i will have to take...
her responsibility.
get lost.
dude...
hi.
aarav, nikhil is getting married.
i don't know about rajveer.
but when are you getting married?
actually, uncle, i have also chosen a girl.
i just need her approval.
how sweet!
who is she?
don't know.
okay.
i want to meet you.
out.
excuse me.
yes.
excuse me, uncle.
cool, dude.
yes.
why have you called me?
i want to talk to you.
okay.
tell me.
i feel we should get married.
what?
nice.
nice joke.
no, rajveer.
i am serious.
look, sneha, i am not at all as you think i am.
in fact, even i don't know what all i have done to how many girls.
i came to tell you just this yesterday.
but i didn't get the chance.
i don't believe you, rajveer.
you know.
honor is dear to every girl.
and yesterday you saw me...
i didn't see anything.
nothing.
you did.
i swear.
i didn't see anything.
you had opened your eyes from time to time.
no, i didn't.
before i could open them, thanks to anjali's ranting...
i lost the moment.
you didn't want to see?
i didn't.
why?
why didn't you want to see?
because because aarav loves you.
but i love you.
but i don't.
so you want to hear it?
i just wanted to use you.
but you couldn't.
because you love me, rajveer.
that's why when i was taking off my clothes, you had shut your eyes.
you know, rajveer.
this is love.
your love is right in front of you, but you don't realize.
and when this friendship turns into liking this liking into love and love into marriage.
you don't even realize.
look at your eyes.
what?
what's in my eyes?
love.
sorry.
what's wrong?
why are you laughing?
i was just kidding.
seems like you're actually in love with me.
what do you mean?
i was just joking.
idiot.
joking.
relax.
you know.
i don't love you.
what did you think?
i don't know anything about you?
dude, anjali is not just my friend, she is like my sister.
okay.
she had told me everything about you and aarav the first day.
the two of you changed your look, style to woo me.
even behavior.
wow.
what did you think?
you would use me like a tissue.
i did.
hey, rajveer.
relax.
no hard feelings.
okay?
it's a wedding.
fooling around is usual.
you joked with me.
so did i.
we are equal.
no sorry.
no apologies.
okay?
yes?
take care.
yes.
aarav loves me.
genuinely.
okay.
and he is a nice guy.
i also like him.
bye.
funny.
do you know?
why you always wear the wedding ring in this finger?
this finger is for your parents.
this is for your siblings.
this is for your friends.
this is for you.
and this is for your life partner.
and this life partner will never leave you.
how cute!
look over there.
oh god!
oh boy!
7... 8. 1... 2... 3... 4... 5... 6... 7... 8.
1... 2... 3... 4.
looking good.
keep it up.
turn.
hello.
what the hell!
what are you guys doing?
hey, aarav.
what are you guys doing?
i thought this would look better.
you know.
dude, what are you doing?
will you get us disgraced in front of everyone in the 'sangeet' .
do it properly.
come on, pal.
rajveer, why aren't you rehearsing?
couldn't find any dance partner?
no one here is worthy of me.
my band.
am i worthy of you?
he...
wow.
vaishali.
hi.
congratulations.
thank god you came before the wedding.
if you hadn't come today, i would've never, ever spoken to you.
hi.
congratulations.
hi.
thank you.
meet my best friend, sneha.
hi.
and this is nikhil's childhood buddy, aarav.
hey.
this is the other childhood buddy.
rajveer.
hi.
rajveer.
hi.
will you be my dance partner?
as you just said.
i'd love to.
of course.
oh.
what.
thank you.
i wonder what the rascal is going to do to her now.
no.
nothing.
we'll take you.
we'll take you with us on a horse.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away as our bride.
we'll take you.
we'll take you with us on a horse.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away as our bride.
millions would be mesmerized by these mesmeric eyes.
she'll fly away with our hearts secretly.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away in front of everyone.
in front of everyone.
even the moon pales in comparison to our stunning beauty.
even the moon pales in comparison to this stunning beauty.
my heart knows no bounds.
i thank my god.
my wish has come true.
i've found heaven on earth.
millions would be mesmerized by these mesmeric eyes.
she'll fly away with our hearts secretly.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away in front of everyone.
in front of everyone.
hey.
why have you come out leaving the 'sangeet'?
nothing.
i got a bit tense about your wedding and money.
come on, tell me.
i know it's something else.
tell me.
what happened?
i am so baffled.
so many girls came and went.
i have dumped them just like that.
didn't give them a second look.
darn her!
she used me.
this has happened to me for the first time.
and i am feeling this for the first time.
those two...
i am jealous.
i can't bear to see the two of them together.
are you... are you in love with sneha?
what the hell.
where are you going?
to aarav.
are you out of your mind?
we'll have to tell him everything.
how long are we going to keep fooling him?
but listen...
sir, you gave us seven days time.
this is just the fourth day, sir.
did i say anything?
did i ask for money from you?
i have come here to ask from someone else.
look, sir, you'll get your money.
once our friend aarav gets married.
who is your third friend?
you mean i won't get the money till he gets married?
is that so?
actually, we friends have bought 1 lakh shares of reliance a few years ago.
and we had signed this contract that this 1 lakh will belong to the one who doesn't marry.
all our friends have got married.
it's just the three of us left.
nikhil is getting married.
and we're setting aarav up with a girl to get him married.
yes.
this aarav and stuff is rubbish.
do you know you're movie stars?
that in the end, you'll kill the villain and take the heroine away.
as if you own it?
you still have three more days.
i want my money within three days.
or you shoot yourselves.
i don't have time even for that.
understood?
see you.
what are you looking at?
now i know how come this dog changed.
you call me a friend.
you call me a friend, don't you?
then why didn't you tell me?
you should've told me once.
i would've sold my father's house to save you.
let alone the stocks.
do you know why i call you a dog?
because a dog is loyal.
you rascal.
ever since childhood, you've fought with me with loyalty, right?
so why now?
why now?
because your thinking is like a dog's tail.
you'll always think in a crooked manner.
get off.
you are worse than him.
there is no abuse for you even in the dictionary.
he didn't tell me anything.
i can understand.
he just doesn't trust me.
but you, nikhil.
you.
why did you not tell me?
you were setting me up with sneha and vaishali for those mere stocks.
look.
look, don't get too emotional.
whatever he has done is for the wedding.
i swear your wedding will not happen.
this guy has put me in trouble.
he has put you in trouble.
and when i put you in trouble, you'll realize what pain is.
i will not get married.
i am not signing the stock papers.
do whatever you can.
rascals.
to hell with you.
to hell with him.
to hell with your wedding.
and to hell with this friendship.
i am going.
to tell father and anjali's father everything.
we will see whatever happens.
if they want to help us, they will help us.
otherwise...
whatever god wills.
hold on.
are you sure?
no.
i don't care.
no matter how much loss i incur.
one crore.
two crores.
i just don't care.
tell that man to withdraw the case.
that's it.
don't give me useless suggestions.
he is already tense.
i want to run the company and not lead it to bankruptcy.
we shouldn't give him more stress.
just do as i say.
let's go.
you are right.
you got it?
let's go.
hey, boys.
yes.
why are you leaving?
come
have a seat.
sit.
anyway, what's the matter?
no, father.
you seem tense.
pests and flies were found in our soft drink gypsy
the man who was sipping it has filed a suit of 50 crores against our company.
scoundrel.
anyway, i will have to go to india for the settlement.
will you guys do one thing?
yes.
tell me, uncle.
just a moment.
this is cash.
two crores.
i am going to india for the settlement.
will you keep it safely till then?
yes, father.
look, this money is for the hotel bills and the marriage expenses.
if my wife or daughter gets hold of it they will splurge it on shopping.
okay?
keep it safely.
what?
don't even think of it.
look, listen to me.
i have a brilliant idea.
brilliant idea?
last time you played stocks.
i am still suffering because of it.
i am not saying to invest it in stocks.
so?
spl.
spl?
have you gone crazy?
you will invest money in spl?
nowadays even beggars invest money in spl.
why can't we?
two crores will become 20 crores in a jiffy.
in an instant.
as it is, only two days are left for the semi-finals and finals.
look, listen to me.
we have no other option right now.
please.
we have an option.
i will go and give this money to gutka king.
that's the only option.
what do you think?
gutka king is a bank.
you will keep depositing money.
even if you give him two crores will he forget the rest of the money?
even if he lets go of it what will you tell uncle when he returns?
what about my marriage?
what marriage are you talking about, nikhil?
the marriage that can't take place.
will gutka king let you get married?
please.
think about it calmly.
this is the last option we have.
20 crores can change our lives.
not 20.
two crores.
two will multiply into 20.
think.
one last gamble.
last time.
please.
trust me.
'welcome to the exciting match... ' '... between the two teams from the south.'
'chennai and hyderabad.'
baba, rajveer.
yes.
tell me.
what's the rate?
70-75.
chennai favorite.
'that's a very quick shot to the boundary.'
'and another one to mid-wicket.'
bet 50 lakhs on hyderabad.
yes.
fine.
'it's really tense out there.'
'that's gone.
that's a good wicket.'
'things look really good for chennai.'
'that will be close.
the umpire's called for the third umpire.
yes!
'out!
'chennai's are going wild.'
wow!
yes. 1.5 crores on chennai.
why on chennai?
they are winning.
leave it to me.
i know the game is going to change.
nikhil, please.
trust me.
yes.
yeah!
'good shot.'
come on.
yes!
nikhil, see this.
baby, please.
later.
honeymoon's dress.
we have still not got married.
oh, no.
you have gone crazy.
'good shot.
very good shot.'
we lost 10.
oh, no.
you guys are gambling?
she is unlucky.
get rid of her.
yes, baby.
leave.
forget it.
move from the front.
'... doing it really well.'
out!
yes!
look.
yeah!
we did it, dude!
yes!
hi.
listen, this is rajveer.
yes.
tell me.
who is the favorite?
bangalore.
at the rate of 80 bet one crore on bangalore.
'that's a glorious shot, covers for boundary.'
'a beautiful start for the mumbai team.'
'that's very close.
will it be catch or run out?
yes!
'the batsman runs between the wickets.'
'there's a huge appeal.'
'for the umpire this is going to be very tough.'
out!
yes!
control it!
'a huge score for the mumbai team.'
yes!
'oh my, god.
that's huge.'
six!
wow.
i told you.
yes!
that's a huge turn around in the play.
come on.
yes!
six!
it looks like a one way traffic the bangalore boys are not going to leave it.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
bangalore is the favorite. 50.
i bet two crores on mumbai.
rajveer, have you gone crazy?
nikhil.
what are you doing?
nikhil, trust me.
bangalore is playing well.
why are you betting on mumbai?
trust me.
i know the game will change again.
there's another one over square leg for six.
it's a catch.
what did i tell you?
caught at the boundary rope.
hi.
what's going on?
who is playing?
yes!
out!
'right at the boundary.'
out!
yes!
wow!
yes!
no matter what you say.
she is lucky for you, man.
she is lucky, dude.
unbelievable performance.
what happened?
get me that girl.
i want her.
please.
i want her.
am i a pimp?
so become one.
total is three crores 40 lakhs.
until now, we have made three crores 40 lakhs from two matches.
your father-in-law's two crores.
five crores 40 lakhs.
now, we will bet five crores 40 lakhs on mumbai.
this time we won't flip.
only mumbai.
right till the end.
welcome to the big day.
mumbai versus chennai.
the best game of the competition.
that's a beautiful boundary through fine leg.
chennai has got a good start.
and that's a huge six...
out.
what a delivery outside the off stump.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
what's the rate?
mumbai is the favorite. 45-50.
i don't want to bet now.
this is a huge turnaround by the...
bold.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
mumbai is the favorite. 65-68.
i don't want to bet now.
it's such a tight game.
nikhil, i know what i am doing.
beautiful pull shot.
that's a beautiful shot.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
tell me.
what's the rate?
mumbai is the favorite. 79-80.
no.
not now.
have you gone crazy?
chennai is trying to get a six.
that's a huge six.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
mumbai. 90-95.
not now.
rajveer, this is...
looks very unlikely.
but...
oh, no.
that's bold.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
chennai favorite. 65-70.
do you want to bet or not?
tell me quickly.
five crores 40 lakhs on mumbai.
yes.
fine.
we need a miracle.'
'good performance by one of their key players.'
'that's another boundary, that's beautifully played.'
'six.'
take it.
out.
this match has been turning around every over.
that's a boundary.
no.
that's out.
that's such a huge turnover.
the crowd cannot believe it.
four.
scoundrel.
bet.
bet more on mumbai.
is that a six or is it going to be out?
that's really high.
what a brilliant catch!
oh, my god.
another brilliant catch.
this is just...
why is this stupid changing the batting order?
nobody expected mumbai to do...
there it is.
out.
chennai are the champions of this tournament
look at the scene.
dancing.
oh, my god.
unbelievable performance!
fireworks are on.
where are you taking me, anjali?
lights.
it's so beautiful.
finally, we are getting married tomorrow.
i am so happy.
i love you.
you did it.
i am so happy, nikhil.
thank you so much.
first you brought my wedding dress.
and now, all this.
you know?
this is how i had always imagined my marriage.
you made my dream come true.
aarav, if i had not invited you for my marriage i wouldn't have got to see all this.
you know what?
you are right.
if i had not come for the marriage i also wouldn't have got to see all this.
thank you so much.
thank you.
nikhil.
fire.
nikhil, run.
nikhil, go back.
baby.
it's okay.
mother.
enough, dear.
mother, the marriage can't take place.
don't cry.
the entire dais got burnt.
my dress also got burnt.
enough, dear.
it's inauspicious for it to get burnt.
quiet.
anjali.
excuse me.
sir, we need to call the police.
the damage is too much.
no need to call the police.
i will pay for the damages.
i will meet you in the office.
okay?
please.
okay, sir.
let's go.
son.
i gave you two crores.
use it to pay the hotel for the damages.
okay?
go.
uncle...
your two crores... got expended.
what?
actually, i had borrowed five crores from someone.
i invested it in the stock market.
to repay eight crores, i invested your two crores in spl.
you embezzled my father's money.
you gambled.
scoundrel.
how could you do this?
because of you my marriage got ruined.
shut up.
just shut up.
nikhil.
you cry all the time.
you have made a spectacle of this marriage.
all the time, my marriage.
my wedding dress.
my this.
my that.
i, me, myself.
where am i in all this?
where are we?
i know rajveer made a mistake.
but today when his life is in danger, what should i do?
should i leave him alone?
should i let him die?
and you, what do you think?
you are everything for me?
nikhil.
they are nothing?
please.
don't say that.
he is my friend.
he is my brother.
i won't let him die alone.
listen...
let anything happen.
i am with him.
what are you saying, nikhil?
anjali, i am solely responsible for whatever happened.
i apologize to you and everybody else.
i am really sorry.
so you set this fire?
what?
not deliberately.
it happened by mistake.
i...
nikhil, i swear it was an accident.
forget the money part.
what was done was done.
assume that it's the price for leaving my daughter.
father.
uncle, please.
you...
uncle.
brother.
brother, listen to me.
the marriage is off.
what are you saying?
we are returning to india tomorrow.
you are calling off the marriage?
what are you doing?
good you showed your true colors.
otherwise i would have really fallen in love with you.
you had already broken friendship.
today, you broke his marriage as well.
i don't know why my eyes search for you in every path.
whatever was in the past still exists.
i am also standing here.
where are you?
beloved, if you had to break my heart.
why did you fall in love with me?
beloved, come once.
beloved.
she was a glass doll.
she fell in love with a stony heart.
she broke in such a way.
nothing was in her hand.
my heart searches there.
where we had exchanged promises.
where we had bowed our head in prayer.
today, i am still alone at the same place.
beloved, if you had to break my heart.
why did you fall in love with me?
beloved, come once.
beloved.
beloved, if you had to break my heart.
why did you fall in love with me?
beloved, come once.
beloved.
you will shoot?
or should i start chewing your tobacco?
before chewing the tobacco, remember one thing.
the packet will cost rs. 2.
cash.
if not that...
talk respectfully.
i will shoot you.
shoot.
he is not alone.
what are you doing here?
they seem close.
bring the dwarf out.
aarav.
you... you...
what are you doing over here?
i am having tobacco.
but...
you should have told me that the money is with him.
i would have picked him up.
i wouldn't have to get him married.
i wouldn't have to get your stock paper signed.
one bullet and two targets.
he would have died and you would have stayed single.
first money would have gone to you.
and then in my hands.
yes?
brother...
will you sign or should i give you some more tobacco.
no, brother.
no.
i cannot have anymore tobacco.
give it to me, brother.
i will sign it.
just a minute, aarav.
wait.
both of you have already done a lot for me.
not only done a lot, but endured a lot as well.
not anymore.
once i am gone, all the problems will be over.
wait.
let me talk to him.
rajveer, do you know what your problem is?
you never understood me.
you never understood our friendship.
no matter how much we fight, quarrel...
no matter how much we mess with each other...
but no outsider can do that.
you couldn't understand such a small thing.
give it to me, brother.
i will sign it.
distribute whatever is left among these poor guys.
listen.
the rs. 8 crores that you are giving isn't a favour.
you had taken money on credit.
this isn't aims.
it belongs to me and you are giving it back.
got it?
and listen without turning back...
don't turn back, give a look like a hero once you reach outside the door.
otherwise, the door will close forever.
got it?
go.
what are you thinking about?
are you waiting for his daughter's wedding?
come on, let's leave.
mr. mittal, don't break off this marriage and leave.
what?
uncle mittal, whatever happened was our fault.
not nikhil's.
and we are extremely sorry for that.
but please, don't punish anjali and nikhil for our mistake.
please.
these are some share certificates.
what?
compensation for whatever loss you have suffered.
please, uncle.
please don't say no.
uncle, please.
where is he?
he is the groom.
he is getting ready.
don't you want to get married?
madam, where are you going?
rajveer, let me go.
for the time being, you will have to come with me.
but...
just a minute, anjali. - but, rajveer, i want to meet nikhil.
sorry, this isn't ravi shankar jaiswal's dress.
no.
it's beautiful.
you know anjali there was a time i was completely against this wedding.
i kept telling nikhil, do whatever you want.
do it and finish the job.
sorry for my language.
but i was wrong.
you know, rajveer, the act that you put up that you care a darn for anyone...
it is all utter nonsense.
what you are doing today is your real character.
thanks, rajveer.
i am so happy.
love you.
you are looking beautiful.
have a look.
what is this?
brother rajveer told me to do so.
first pinch and then give this.
okay.
hey.
come.
come here.
hey, what are you doing?
what way is this?
you used 50 new tricks while flirting.
and you completely goof-up while proposing.
goof-up?
but...
listen, rajveer, let's do this nicely.
come on, get down on your knees.
knees?
get down on your knees.
come on.
sneha, someone might see us.
rajveer, why are you thinking so much?
someone might see us.
get down on your knees.
come on.
hold this.
what is this?
rakhi .
a ring.
a ring?
you sent it.
me?
rajveer!
just a minute.
i didn't send any ring.
you are just too much.
i agree that you didn't send this ring.
but you had at least put it on her.
aarav.
if you can send flowers for me, can't i send a ring?
this...
me.
you guys.
by the power vested in me, i now pronounce you, man and wife.
kiss the bride.
listen.
you know what?
just off.
stop.
have you come with the wedding procession?
or are you here to get some charity?
is this how a wedding procession looks like?
there is no band, no song, no music.
we are crazy about your beauty.
let us come in.
go away, romeo.
we have seen many like you.
we are crazy about your beauty.
let us come in.
go away, romeo.
we have seen many like you.
let me be in your arms.
for eternity.
life feels like heaven in your arms.
now i will take you away.
son...
what is wrong with him?
what are you doing?
nikhil.
give him a divorce.
listen.
i have never got a girl.
i am 28 years old and still single.
are you proposing to me?
i didn't tell you?
no.
that's what i have been trying to do since so long.
you won't run away, will you?
you won't scold me?
i had never even in my dreams thought that i will fall in love with someone.
sneha.
father.
father is also here?
this is a great miracle.
father.
doomed!
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you make the world smile.
happiness lies in you.
whatever you say calms my heart down.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
__file_terminal__
a afghandk
'welcome, family, fellow faculty members and friends.'
'thank you for joining us today in the celebration of... ' '... the graduating class of 2002.'
'i proudly can say each student standing in front of me... ' '... has not only worked hard, but has worked honestly... ' '... in graduating today.'
'i only hope you can continue to carry out this style of working... ' '... not only in your career, but for the rest of your lives.'
'graduation is also a time to look... ' '... at what the future has in store for each of us.'
'it is a very serious time.
a time to take a look at... '
pal, there's graduation day.
teacher's day.
mother's day.
father's day.
rose day.
valentines day.
when will there be a sex day?
don't know about the sex day.
but there will a gpl day for sure.
and that day all you lustful people will get a kick up your back side.
it's a case of sour grapes.
right, moron.
i am nervous here.
whether i should propose to anjali or not.
and the two of you are fighting over days?
look, love and all is just meant for killing time.
i believe in just having a good time and moving on.
you'll never be able to say i love you if you listen to rubbish like this.
listen to me.
go right now and open your heart to her.
open whatever you want.
except the heart.
don't do this stupidity.
he does our share of it.
so why should you?
just chill, friends.
don't mess my brain up.
i'll do whatever i need to.
go and get cozy with your girls.
'2002 as graduates.'
congratulations.
good luck, brother.
good, brother.
yes.
say something nice for once.
that is what i am saying.
say something nice for once.
you know what?
just off.
you know what?
just off.
'rajveer and aarav.'
'their friendship is like that of jai and veeru.'
'no.
no.
tom and jerry.'
'jai and veeru.' 'tom and jerry.
'jai... ' 'actually, nobody knows.'
'except one.'
'nikhil.'
anjali, i have been trying to woo you ever since i was a kid.
i can't live without you.
i am crazy for you.
i love you.
anjali. - 'this is nikhil's rotten old love story.'
what did you just say?
you love me?
no.
i guess it was a mistake.
stupid.
you took so long to say this.
'some people do it before marriage.'
'and some after marriage.'
'i mean love.'
'as in aarav.'
will you marry me?
what?
yes.
marry me.
are you out of your head?
marry me?
i thought you wanted to kiss me.
i thought you wanted to...
'and the result is.'
i am leaving you.
no, baby.
bye.
just leave me.
please don't leave me.
bugsy, don't leave me.
i'll be making up.
'and he does it before marriage.'
'but doesn't marry.'
what are your plans after this?
what do you mean?
are you asking me for marriage?
are you out of your mind?
marriage and me?
i was asking what your plans are after graduation.
this is the new brand ambassador of lsd.
come on.
you can do it.
come on.
yes.
come on.
friends, friends.
this is the real man.
he has agreed to our seven conditions before getting married.
that's why dheeraj is our risk taker.
he is a risk taker for sure.
he is getting married at age 22.
he'll be the father of two kids when he is 25.
all the important parts of the body will stop working when he is 30.
what will be his gifts?
diabetes and blood pressure.
pension plan at 35.
old age at 40.
he'll die at 45.
i don't agree.
you must marry if your love is true.
because marriage and kids...
yes, my darling rakesh.
rajveer, market is up.
shall we buy shares of reliance?
sure.
okay.
buy 1000.
only 1000?
i suggest let's buy 1 lakh shares.
you've to take big risks to be a big man.
live in relationships...
all the best.
hello.
what are you thinking?
okay, i'll talk to you later.
okay.
friends.
i have an idea.
let's play a game.
game?
what game?
why don't you have a bet?
what bet?
let's contribute and buy reliance's shares.
after a few years, the one who doesn't get married will get all the shares and money.
what kind of a bet is this?
this is the bet.
idiots, think about it.
today the price of this share is rs.140.
1400 after a year.
1 lakh shares x1400.
what say, friends?
i am ready.
who else?
come on.
friends, i am ready for the bet.
because i am not going to get married either.
yes.
son, i'll be taking this money.
we shall see, rascal.
me too.
superb.
i am only going to win.
yes.
this means everyone is ready except one.
actually, even i am in.
look, son, i suggest don't bet on the money.
you just might be the first one to get married.
i don't think so.
i am unlucky.
when i propose to a girl, she runs away.
that's true.
i will come to know that all of you have got married.
i am the only one left.
so let me take the plunge.
i will earn money.
if not get a girl.
what say?
okay.
so, friends.
what say?
deal?
okay.
deal.
deal
that is cool.
anjali, what has nikhil said that has got you so frustrated.
then what do i do?
you know, sneha.
i have always had a dream that i get married out of india on a grand level.
there is a diamond ring in my finger.
i wear a dress designed by ravishankar jaiswal.
in fact, i had even chosen the wedding dress.
but whenever i talk about marriage nikhil comes up with an excuse.
seems like he is not interested in marriage.
anjali, nikhil is among those who are scared of committing to marriage.
you will have to break up with him in order to marry someone else.
break up?
yes, saket?
my dear.
how are you, pal?
i am doomed, pal.
ever since my father's death, nothing good has been happening to me.
listen, there has been an income tax raid at my boss's house.
it could be my turn any time.
i am sending my boss's rs.
5 crores to your house.
please manage.
5 crores?
yes.
sure.
send it here.
it is your own house.
take it back when you feel like.
i am a bit rushed now.
speak to you later.
bye.
see you.
bye.
rakesh, listen to me carefully.
tell me.
have to invest 5 crores urgently in the market.
and i want to double it urgently.
can you do it?
but where did you get so much money from?
p. chidambaram has given it to me.
said its the governments money.
is lying idle.
invest in stock market.
the country will benefit.
why are you getting so annoyed?
i will invest in satyam infotech.
and yes.
my commission will be double.
take whatever you want.
as if i have to give it from my pocket.
5 crores.
10 crores.
sex.
listen, nikhil.
i want to talk to you about something really important.
yes.
same here.
but you say first.
see, nikhil, we have known each other since childhood.
we like each other.
in fact, we love each other a lot too.
but the progress a relationship should make...
but i feel something different now.
i think i am done with relationships.
you are getting my point, right?
yes.
look, anjali, what happens is there comes a time in everyone's life when he gets bored of the daily routine.
even i want something new.
something more.
something more exciting.
you know.
i guess this is what i wanted to tell you.
we should start a new life.
correct.
and i have brought you here to this romantic place so that we end whatever we had between us and start something new.
you are right.
let us break up.
dude, why are you sitting here like the statue of liberty?
hey, anjali.
hi.
nice dress.
you were coming here.
you should've told me.
we would've come here together.
rajveer.
please.
go from here.
okay.
inconvenience regretted.
henceforth put the board of don't disturb on your table.
i will take a u turn.
okay.
hey, black forest.
rajveer.
please.
don't eat it.
i am not eating it.
look, you know very well.
rajveer.
i start drooling when i see cherry and cream.
raj...
rajveer.
there is a stone in the cake.
excuse me.
come here.
come on.
you're actually getting married.
nikhil, are you out of your mind?
rajveer, please just get the hell out of here.
right now.
okay.
relax.
relax, folks.
i am sorry.
childhood friends.
anjali, i don't know what you think about me.
i don't know whether you'll be able to live without me or not.
but i won't be able to live without you.
will you marry me?
yes.
finally.
hey...
what's up?
what is the occasion?
wearing pink today.
hey, brother.
how are you?
what are the two of you doing here?
we have come to mess up your life.
actually, there wasn't no entry put up outside.
so i came in.
yes.
as if the two of you need invitations to come or go?
no.
look, boss.
anjali is coming here today.
with her mother and father.
to meet my mother and father.
wow.
fantastic.
so i don't want my marriage broken because of the two of you.
so why don't you get the out of here then?
come on.
the door is that way.
thank you.
nikhil, you know.
you should always throw garbage out of the house.
throw him out.
why should i go?
hi, uncle.
i was always in favor of your marriage.
look, there will not be any tension because of me.
i can't say anything about the rest.
don't even think.
i am not going anywhere.
we are your friends.
your family.
how will the girl and her family feel when they come here?
none of your friends are here.
look, this is how it is.
you didn't listen to me.
i didn't.
you have a death wish.
good luck.
we will do our duties as your friends.
peacefully
peacefully.
the two of you.
do you know how big jerks the two of you are?
sorry.
i am sorry for what happened yesterday.
but, i swear.
we will be at our best behavior.
look, there won't be any problem because of us.
trust me.
let me see.
uncle...
folks.
please.
you will not come out of this room.
please.
may we receive them?
please.
a little help.
please, brother.
please.
thank you.
every time.
thanks to you.
oh my god!
hi.
how are you, son?
how are you, mom?
fine, thank you.
hi, sir.
how are you, man?
forget it, let's eat it.
you should at least have manners that you shouldn't eat before the guests.
so, where should we start from?
what?
look, kids need to marry.
you know.
and why are you eating like a beggar?
there's a small problem.
you know anjali, her grandma.
she's going to die.
oh, god.
dad.
excuse me.
you are saying that for my mother.
sorry, mom.
sorry, dear.
sorry, mother-in-law.
this fork and spoon isn't made to stare at.
they are made for eating.
idiot.
this is how you eat?
with a fork and spoon, without opening your mouth wide and without making a sound.
whether i use my hands, or my mouth to eat why does it concern you?
what is your problem?
listen, you dog.
don't badmouth me.
then what should i do, rascal?
rajveer, shut your mouth or else...
or else what?
what will you do?
hit me.
why the...
we have very little time.
and i want this marriage to get over with at jet speed.
you know.
two weeks.
big resort.
dubai.
take that.
rajveer, what have you done?
you two have ruined the food.
sorry.
rascal.
what's going on?
what is happening here?
what are you boys doing?
what the...
oh, no.
i am sorry for this.
they injured my father's head, nikhil.
you won't invite your friends to our marriage.
and if they attend the marriage then i won't go ahead with it.
what are you saying?
they are my best friends.
i know they are slightly mischievous.
they are slightly stupid as well.
but that doesn't mean that you will punish them so severely.
it's my marriage.
stupid?
they are scoundrels.
nikhil.
we only get married once.
and i want our marriage to be perfect.
listen, baby.
just calm down.
i promise you i am going to give you a perfect wedding, okay.
how?
everything's going wrong.
my marriage dress isn't ready yet.
the designer from whom i want to stitch my dress is busy making a dress for a famous movie actress's wedding.
he completely refused to make a dress for me.
so what's the problem?
ask some other designer to make your dress.
no, dear.
no one can make a dress like jaiswal.
he's just wonderful.
and if he doesn't design my dress then i won't get married.
what?
what's the problem?
two minutes ago my friends were a problem for you.
and now this wedding dress is coming between us.
this is so ridiculous.
i don't want to hear anything.
but what is your problem.
no wedding dress, no marriage.
but that's...
invite aarav, no marriage.
this is madness.
invite rajveer, and no marriage.
you have lost your mind.
that's it.
i am done.
okay, i am done too.
the witch.
even i don't want to marry you.
anjali has clearly refused that you two cannot attend the wedding.
and being a henpecked husband you said yes.
bravo.
but, i am your wedding planner.
i mean, planning your wedding, the decorations is my business, friendship aside.
so, i think i can come.
you cannot come.
sorry.
fine.
i am leaving.
bye.
okay.
yes.
you didn't leave.
he doesn't even try to stop me.
yes.
what a filthy man.
seriously.
just leave, don't stop.
selfish rascal.
you forgot everything, didn't you?
in your childhood, when girls wouldn't even look at you that's when i taught you how to talk to girls.
i taught you to play doctor with girls.
i even taught you how to propose to girls.
i got you your first kiss.
i bought you your first condom.
back then you used to say thank you, thank you.
but today i...
listen, listen.
i remember everything.
no need to remind me, understand.
and if you're that good a friend then get me that jaiswal's wedding dress.
can you two do it?
what is this?
aarav, where have you brought us?
that ravi shankar jaiswal.
yes.
he's coming here to attend a party function.
what are you saying?
that is why we are here.
and you please stay quiet.
get lost.
look, we have made it until here.
please don't create any problem, okay.
please.
surprising.
i am helping you and you are scolding me.
he is right.
you want a wedding dress for anjali, don't you?
we will get it for you.
not we, me.
and please don't say anything here because only sophisticated, cultured and well-mannered people come to this place.
you mean gay.
not all are gay, some are sophisticated like me.
that means gay.
ask him to shut up or i will shut him up.
i will keep my mouth shut.
and anyway, what is my point of speaking in such a place.
you say it.
here.
come on.
wait.
so, mister.
what is the problem?
you cannot go in until you don't wear this superman dress.
we want to walk in and not fly.
come on.
wear it once and then you will see what flies inside.
get lost.
he's crazy.
come on, let's go.
we'll meet him some other day.
it concerns my marriage.
wear it.
red underwear?
pint t-shirt.
it will look nice on us.
sophisticated.
cultured.
well-mannered.
this is crazy.
today we had to dress like superman for his marriage god knows what tomorrow.
do you have a problem?
then go outside.
hey, take him outside.
shut up, you two.
the underwear's so tight and you two are uttering nonsense.
he was such a...
i was so fed up, you know.
to hell.
excuse me.
where can i find mr. jaiswal?
forget about jaiswal, give us tequila shots.
three.
yes, get it.
hi, handsome.
excuse me.
what are you smiling about?
handsome.
look.
do not touch.
fly.
what is it?
what?
you ask.
fly.
ask.
so, superman.
can we fly?
of course.
wherever he goes, he flies there.
look, super... woman, man.
whatever.
i cannot even address him properly.
look, don't touch me.
don't misbehave.
stay away.
otherwise i will kick you so hard on your back that i will turn you into a super-duper bumper.
how dare you?
dudes.
everyone come here.
come here.
don't think we are weak.
even we can fight.
really?
what's your problem?
tell us.
just leave.
boss.
i am requesting you.
please let us meet mr. jaiswal.
i want him to make a wedding dress for my would-be wife.
oh, well.
that's not possible.
and even if it had been possible then we wouldn't have told you.
because your friend sucks.
look, i am requesting you.
if he doesn't make the wedding dress then my wedding will be called off.
okay, we will.
but one condition.
let's have a dance competition.
let's see if you all are the best.
if you are the best then you have a meeting with ravi shankar jaiswal.
and if you turn out to be the worst, then...
then?
then.
nobody knows.
we are the supermen.
and we want to fly.
want to fly, high, high.
high, high, high.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
we own the nights, and also the days.
it's an ambience filled with excitement.
we will create a ruckus.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
we are the supermen.
and we want to fly.
want to fly, high, high.
high, high, high.
live this moment.
don't care a darn no matter how much the world troubles you.
breathe deeply in my arms.
don't let distances crop up.
no matter what the world says, come on.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
just let us sit on your lap.
let us sit on your lap and tell us lullabies.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
we won't abuse you.
you don't abuse us.
we are the supermen.
and we want to fly.
want to fly, high, high.
high, high, high.
superb.
great.
please.
go back.
superb.
fantastic.
mind-blowing, boys.
you rocked my party.
my party was getting so boring.
who is he?
you just set my party on fire.
there's fire raging everywhere.
i am so happy.
who is he?
he is ravi shankar jaiswal, you naughty boy.
i see.
sorry, we got a little too carried away.
no worries, boys.
you're bound to have such fun at this age.
and that's exactly what we all did as well.
nikhil.
don't worry about your fiancé's wedding dress.
i am going to do it.
and it will be a wedding dress from my side.
yes.
thank you so much, aarav.
anytime.
thank you.
thank you so much.
i really want you guys to be a part of my wedding.
of course.
excuse me.
even i helped in getting the dress.
i need a hug too.
i hugged her genuinely.
i am doing it genuinely as well.
she's your future sister-in-law.
wasn't she yours?
of course.
guys, guys.
sneha.
sneha's come, nikhil.
sneha.
come, let's go.
let's go, let's go.
guys, i will see you later.
sneha?
what a girl?
sexy.
what a beauty.
i am serious.
i am serious too.
by that i meant marriage.
done.
once i get over with the honeymoon then you can marry her.
okay.
who do you think you are?
i will win over this girl.
by hook or by crook.
place a bet if you want.
coward.
done.
good luck.
bro.
good luck, bro.
we are meeting after a year.
i missed you so much.
you know what, i also missed you.
forget that.
you say that you missed me.
but you completely forgot me after going to the us.
two doors in the same bathroom.
oh, no.
were you too busy?
thank god i came here only to wash my hands.
what did you get so many gifts for?
this is for you and...
nikhil.
hello.
we aren't married yet.
if i forget then later you will say that i didn't give a gift.
where is your boyfriend?
he was supposed to come with you, wasn't he?
he didn't come.
why?
break up.
what?
oh my, god.
you broke up with him as well?
yes.
is there a big importance of break up in your life?
first you advised me on the phone and you broke up yourself.
you know what, babe.
it's not like that.
we hadn't even dated for six days when he proposed to me for marriage.
i was like are you mad.
you should have seen him.
side-parting, oily hair.
always suited-booted.
no style, nothing.
he would talk so mannerly it seemed like he was misbehaving.
no abusing, or foul-mouthing.
dude, i am your girlfriend.
why are you being so formal?
that was fine.
i would have managed.
but...
but what?
no party, no flirting, no fun, no kissing, no...
i was like, look, better get lost.
wow, great.
great thoughts, madam.
listen, if its true love then you should get married.
understand.
i believe in love.
i want to get married.
but not like this.
let me enjoy life first.
you are a...
you?
you haven't left yet.
no.
i...
what?
get it.
what?
get me that girl, please.
what?
you think i am a pimp.
then be one.
how does it matter?
can't you do this much for your friend?
look.
she is anjali's best friend.
she is like a sister.
but she isn't her sister, is she?
and i am not her brother either.
look.
she is not your type of girl and neither are you her type.
she likes well-cultured, well-mannered boys.
nonsense.
understand.
and anyway, i don't want you to pull such tricks in my marriage.
forget that girl, forget this house, and get going.
a small introduction.
small.
i will handle the rest.
please.
intro.
you can do that.
come on.
thank you.
listen.
just say good things.
yes.
i will tell her about all your good things.
i will tell her how many girls you made pregnant.
how many you have seduced.
and how many illegitimate children you have.
enough.
i will tell her everything.
i asked you to say good things and not be honest.
you are going to rape me in front of her.
otherwise you will do her.
look, she's a nice and sweet girl.
she needs a simple and sober guy.
not someone like you.
understand.
simple and sober.
how is that possible?
let my heart keep singing.
no, no, no.
dev sir is too evergreen for me.
hello.
i don't know anything about other things except for my own subject.
amol sir.
he's too simple.
allow me to leave.
simple.
dharampur, dharampur, dharampur.
oh, god.
mangalore, bangalore, mangalore, bangalore.
ashok kumar.
mandva, khandva.
it will take my entire lifetime.
talegaon.
malegaon.
not that long.
'you should at least know that... ' '... you shouldn't eat before the guests.'
no way.
i will rather die but...
but...
come back.
'this fork and spoon isn't made to stare at.'
'they are made for eating.'
now, he will make my plan successful.
simple... and sober.
oh, my.
he will ask for money.
good afternoon.
hello.
what is this?
your friends always come on time and ruin everything.
today, by not coming on time are they planning to ruin our wedding?
you should be happy.
pray that they don't come.
we will at least be able to get married.
hey, sex.
hi.
would you be my baby?
you?
yes, me.
what is this, boss?
why is your hair standing?
did you come on a bike?
whose clothes have you worn?
style, sex.
that's called style.
style?
okay.
where's the other joker?
hi, friends.
oh no.
why are you guys staring at me?
didn't you recognize me?
i am your dear friend rajveer.
you... you...
why has your hair gone flat?
what is this?
well...
hey, sunny.
sunny.
you... you...
come here.
take care.
come.
you take care.
'he is copying my style to woo sneha.'
poor guy.
'he doesn't know that sneha doesn't want a simpleton... ' '... but someone who is debauchee.'
off.
hey, hot-bun.
aarav.
nikhil's the best friend.
yeah.
sneha.
nice to meet you.
we have just introduced ourselves.
we haven't met.
too fast.
and furious.
curious.
serious.
about you.
you are so funny, man.
cool.
i apologize but if you brother and sister are done with your display of affection then can i go inside?
no.
you cannot.
you are very rude.
i'll have to do something.
my foot.
ouch.
sit properly.
i'm sorry.
sorry.
i hope you didn't get hurt.
no, it's okay.
my name is rajveer.
hi.
sneha.
it's a pleasure to meet you.
same here.
but i don't feel so.
look, you...
we both are talking to each other.
yes.
i request you not to interfere while we are talking.
you...
condoms?
what?
disgusting.
aarav.
he is so foul-mouthed.
what is he saying?
stop it.
what?
it's okay.
you are going to dubai?
yes.
no.
she is going to london.
i am going to america.
and the flight we are catching is going to west indies.
why don't you meet a doctor?
aarav.
you have a problem of talking too much.
oh really?
what are you doing?
why are you troubling this poor soul?
keep quiet.
one second.
tell him.
yes.
i am going to dubai.
actually, i am going to attend anjali's wedding.
i am her very good friend.
you too are anjali's friend?
well... no.
i am...
nikhil's friend.
one of.
wow.
then we will have a lot of fun in the wedding.
oh yeah.
we will have a lot of fun.
yeah.
you, me and...
there are flowers blooming everywhere.
okay, guys.
it's time for the flight.
see you.
yeah.
see you soon.
bye.
i won't spare you.
you are messing with me?
i won't spare you, you scoundrel.
aarav has really done a great job with the wedding arrangements.
beautiful.
really.
ladies and gentlemen.
may i have your attention, please?
here he comes.
please.
listen, everybody.
today, my daughter anjali and nikhil are getting engaged.
whenever i see my daughter only one thought comes to my mind.
my daughter, she is brave like her father.
and whenever i see nikhil i feel...
that he is very simple and sober, like his father.
right?
uncle.
i can say just one thing when i look at anjali.
true and loyal friend.
and nikhil, cool and handsome.
i want to say something.
excuse me, please.
sure.
thank you.
nikhil, my friend, my buddy.
he is brave.
like father like son.
yeah.
and after marriage he will be a tamed pet.
meow.
right, sneha?
isn't it funny?
yeah?
and anjali?
oh, the beautiful anjali.
sexy mother's sexy daughter.
i want to eat you, baby.
yeah.
she is going to be his ringmaster.
the one in command.
when she will express her love it will look as if she is growling.
where had you gone?
why did you go there?
with whom did you go?
how much money did you spend?
isn't it?
isn't it, sneha?
oh yeah.
yeah.
we all told him not to get married.
this is a trap.
you will get trapped.
but he paid no heed.
now look, this fool got trapped.
now no matter what you do.
no matter how much cajoling you do, you will have to face the whip.
isn't it, sneha?
what happened?
why are all of you so quiet?
did you like it so much?
thank you.
what is this?
i too want to say something.
rajveer.
one is enough.
will you too...
well, i feel long speeches are very boring.
hence i want to say just two words.
husband and wife are like the two wheels of a chariot.
the chariot cannot move even if one wheel breaks.
but i know that my friend nikhil and anjali's relation will never break.
because their relationship is very pure.
very clean.
very true.
wow.
if he is sour, she is sweet.
if he is the sky, then she is the land.
if he is happiness, then she is sadness.
if he is the sun, she is the moon.
if he is fire, she is a fire cracker, sorry, water.
though they are different from each other but they are incomplete without each other.
that's it.
this is all i have to say.
wow.
cool.
whatever he said was nice.
i didn't understand what he said.
but his hindi is very nice.
thank you.
beautiful.
please.
i said whatever came to my heart.
that's it.
these were your two words?
no matter how many they were they were better than yours.
i couldn't understand whether you were uniting or separating them.
you know what?
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you make the world smile.
happiness lies in you.
whatever you say calms my heart down.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
by keeping you in my eyes, i come back from death.
i will be happy to give my life for you.
by keeping you in my eyes, i come back from death.
i will be happy to give my life for you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
two minutes.
where are you taking me?
two minutes.
now slowly open your eyes.
okay?
okay.
slowly.
how beautiful.
you like it?
yeah.
you made it?
yeah.
18 ½ hours.
for me?
is there anyone else here?
and yes, forget the waves, nothing can destroy it.
oh no.
come.
oh no.
did it have to rain now?
oh, god.
how did it start raining all of a sudden?
i know.
but, how romantic.
what timing.
right?
well, like in the old movies...
the hero and heroine are walking and all of a sudden it starts raining.
there is lightening and...
and the heroine runs towards the hero and gives him a tight hug.
and then they both realise, oh, god.
what did we do?
and then, both of them lose themselves into each other's eyes.
like this.
and then their lips inch closer.
and when the hero is about to his the heroine she runs away.
like this.
what timing, god.
one dirham is equal to rs.12.50.
yes, boss.
rs. 12.50.
i have earned it for my family.
sorry, boss.
not to build your body.
sorry, boss.
scoundrel.
sneha.
please wait.
where are you going?
sneha.
tell me something, rajveer.
why are you and aarav after me?
don't you have a girlfriend?
i do.
who?
me?
hey.
who is with me other than you in this dark night?
no one.
so you are mine, right?
okay.
so what can you do for me, that is your girlfriend?
do... do...
do...
what is this?
do...
a rhythm.
do, do, do, do.
a rhythm.
okay.
do, do, do, do.
sing along.
it's nice, but sing it in tune.
why are you singing like crazy...
i mean how are you singing?
in this way, we will never be in tune.
that is what i am trying to say.
if you sing like this, how will we be in tune?
look, please, make an attempt.
otherwise, how will there be love?
okay.
okay then.
i will sing for you.
you help me with the rhythm.
okay.
here we go.
you, me and this night.
it's something very simple.
the sky is sad.
because the moon is with me.
you, me and this night.
it's something very simple.
the sky is sad.
because the moon is with me.
my heart tells me...
i should commit a mistake.
if you touch me...
i will be fragrant.
you, me and this night.
you are a nice person.
but you hold a secret.
in this wet night...
i fear getting influenced by you.
you are a nice person.
but you hold a secret.
in this wet night...
i fear getting influenced by you.
you, me and this night.
we've been thinking for so long that what would be the seven conditions that will decide whether you are men yet or not.
what do you mean?
do you see that shop?
which one?
the toy shop.
will you ever grow up?
look besides the toy shop, the lingerie shop.
yes, so.
go in there, wear a bra, take a photo and show it to us.
go on.
have you lost your mind?
i...
i will wear a bra?
what will i say?
i want a bra.
you have lost your mind.
you forgot about the seven conditions, right?
this is one of the seven.
now you can go dance, sing, do whatever you want.
are you serious?
go on.
have you lost your mind?
you will get me killed some day.
what the...
excuse me, sir.
can i help you?
no.
no, no, thanks.
i am just checking out something.
oh no.
you.
dad.
what are you doing here?
i...
i came to see the trial room.
you came to see a lingerie trial room?
what are you doing here?
i want to see your original colours.
i want to see the type of guy my daughter is marrying.
open your shirt.
we may have a situation.
are you serious?
stop.
look at him.
guards.
catch him.
shut up, guys.
he's gay.
stop.
stop, guys.
stop.
yes, where are you?
everyone's looking for you.
mr. rajveer.
if you want to meet your friend again...
but who...
hey, so there you are.
by god, you're looking sexy.
and who are they?
hey, dude, what's up?
do you chew tobacco?
sorry.
buses, shops, houses.
stairs and trains.
on walls, do you spit red colour?
excuse, are you... talking to me.
everywhere in india wherever you see the colour red its because of me.
except for the red fort.
now even ladies spit red colour.
later they suffer... from paralysis of the face.
i gave people this style.
only for rs. 2.
pay rs. 2 and take this style.
what nonsense is he blabbering?
who is he?
out of all the people that die due to cancer in india half of them is caused due to chewing my tobacco.
so?
so, you have taken my money.
now think what will happen to you.
your friend saket.
his father's dead.
saket will die too.
i fed him so much tobacco that there's red colour left in his body, but only of the tobacco.
my eight crores.
will you return it after chewing the tobacco or before?
not you.
i will make him chew him.
you said that you will make ten out of five.
double.
i am only asking for eight.
two crores will be your brokerage.
fine, happy.
you mean we made profit.
we made profit.
then you will have to thank me.
i made profit for you, dude.
you invested my five crores, understand.
and i didn't even get five lakhs from it.
not even five lakhs.
look, uncle.
i took your money.
why have you kidnapped him?
if i kidnap you then who will pay me my money?
i apologise for whatever happened.
please.
don't apologise to me.
apologise to him, your friend.
it's not his mistake, uncle.
let him go.
he's getting married after seven days.
he won't.
pay me my money within seven days.
and if i don't get the money then i don't care whether your friend lives or dies.
and you can contact anyone you want.
any goons, don, police, minister, etcetera, etcetera.
anyone, anyone.
no one can get this marriage done, if i don't want to.
sorry.
beg, borrow, steal, rob a bank.
do whatever you want.
but return him his money.
i have a suggestion.
tell your father-in-law.
tell him i want dowry.
why do i feel that nikhil just slapped you?
you did, didn't you, nikhil?
yes, he did.
yes.
do you want as well?
come on.
here you go.
hey.
you asked for it and i did.
i won't get such an opportunity again.
stop dancing.
do you know what he has done?
what could he have done?
he must have misbehaved with some girl.
what else can he do?
changing the look doesn't change the person.
you are a lowly man and you will stay one.
and that's why sneha will...
will marry me.
this is nothing.
he has created a bigger mess.
no.
wait.
found it.
beat me more.
found it.
what did you find?
why are you laughing?
do you want to hit?
come on.
hit.
no.
beat me.
it's okay.
found it.
have you gone crazy?
what did you find?
found it.
he has gone crazy.
found it.
rajveer, leave.
rajveer, what are you doing?
what are you doing, rajveer?
sorry.
have you gone insane?
aarav was beating you badly.
and you were laughing crazily.
did you get a fit of laughing?
that's the game, boss.
today, he slapped me.
but when i will beat him, he won't even realize it.
beat?
whom?
what are you saying?
i don't understand anything.
look, we want eight crores.
aarav has 10-12 crores.
ask me how.
how?
reliance shares.
no matter how down the market is.
if we sell reliance shares, we will get at least 10-12 crores.
i will throw eight crores on gutka's face.
and we will keep four crores for ourselves.
aarav should just sign the contract.
amazing!
let's talk to him.
he is our friend.
he will help us.
come on.
are you mad?
are you crazy?
sit here.
what will you go and say?
sign for rajveer.
hearing my name he will get so infuriated that his body will tremble with rage.
he won't get infuriated.
talk to him.
he won't even look at the contract, leave alone sign it.
do one thing.
leave everything to me.
just trust me.
somehow convince aarav to get married.
married?
since childhood he couldn't entice a girl.
from where will you bring a bride for him?
look, listen to me.
don't use your brains.
please.
just trust me.
he will get married.
and we will get our freedom.
not red and yellow.
i want those beautiful white curtains.
you know, those white curtains with orchid flowers on it.
beautiful.
the same thing that we did during shilpa's wedding.
it will be done.
where should i put the candles?
where?
put it on some table.
fine.
i will do that.
everybody is talking like rajveer.
sir, the fitting is fine?
it's not too tight, is it?
it's not tight.
come on.
the marriage should take place.
it will be more than enough.
ranjeet.
yes, sir.
after sir's fitting take my measurements too.
fine, sir.
aarav.
yes.
listen, are you serious about sneha?
dead serious.
so propose to her.
i will get married soon.
everybody will return home.
she will go to us.
you will be in india.
yes.
what will you do here alone?
listen.
listen to me.
propose to her.
along with me you also get married.
you are saying this?
it took you 50 years to propose.
and you are telling me to marry in five minutes.
i will fix your marriage.
as it is, anjali told me sneha likes you.
not rajveer.
what are you saying?
yes.
really?
who doesn't like me?
hey, sex.
sex.
why are you staring at me?
finally, you have shown your true colors.
true colors?
excuse me.
this is my true color.
yes.
but you are copying me right now.
because he couldn't impress sneha.
get lost.
my formula is simple.
if i get the girl, i take her.
if i don't get her, somebody else will take her.
who will waste so much time for a girl?
and you.
i lost the bet that we had waged for sneha.
but you have not won.
and i won't let you win.
mister, i won't give up.
understood?
let's see.
sir, which light do you want?
night lights or db lights.
db?
db means dance bar.
my friend, it's not a dance bar.
it's a marriage.
come.
i will come with you.
otherwise you will convert the wedding dais into a dance bar.
right?
come.
i will tell you where to put up the lights.
listen.
he remembered that i have organized a bachelor party this evening.
on my behalf.
are you mad?
gutka king is after our lives.
and you want to party.
i am doing all this for gutka king's money.
bachelor party is just an excuse.
so that sneha thinks ill of me.
and aarav already doesn't think well of me.
shake it.
girl, you think you might be loving.
girl, you think you might be fun.
but let me say, girl, you are honey.
let me see you.
i am your daddy, girl.
oh, no.
i am your daddy, girl.
anjali.
anjali, calm down.
how?
if he makes one mistake, i can forgive him.
but they are competing.
as long as cheap friends like rajveer and aarav are in his life i won't marry him.
he will have to either leave his friends or me.
i am talking to father.
anjali.
relax.
don't make haste.
let's think of something.
fine?
i will bring water for you.
are you badly hurt?
no.
forget it.
listen, what are you doing here?
i want to tell you something.
i like your hair.
it's changed.
leave my hair.
okay.
i had called the strippers and the item girls
so?
since the time i have come here i didn't get time to do anything.
it's okay.
so?
what do you mean so?
i am really a playboy and...
sneha.
oh, god.
hi.
you had gone to fetch water, hadn't you?
yes.
are you taking a shower?
i thought i will freshen up.
at 2 o'clock in the night?
yes.
i was feeling a little tired.
come.
take a bath.
i am really stressed.
i need to talk to you.
take a bath.
i will stand here and talk to you.
will you take a bath fully clothed?
you know what, sneha?
you were right.
i don't think you should marry nikhil.
do you know?
i always felt nikhil is different from other boys.
but no.
he also turned out to be cheap like rajveer and aarav.
he shows interest in other girls while i am there.
you saw, didn't you, sneha?
nikhil was all over them.
it's true.
all boys are the same.
dog.
they see a girl and...
are you sister sneha?
no.
mantu...
what is this?
for whom is this flower?
for sister sneha.
brother aarav has given.
you go.
i'll handle this.
okay.
pal, is he proposing to sneha for sex or marriage?
orange flower?
he is a duffer.
i'll go talk to him.
'the fragrance of henna will not suffice you.'
'so i thought of sending the fragrance of flowers too.'
'with love.
aarav.'
yes, aarav.
you can do it.
confidence.
hey.
i really liked the flowers you sent.
really?
thanks.
flowers?
i had sent one...
i would've liked it just as much if you had sent just one.
really?
you're flirting, aren't you?
yes.
i like flirting with you.
i feel very special when you're with me.
just kidding.
mad.
shall we have food?
lunch.
shall we have lunch?
good idea.
actually, i am also really bored of having food in this hotel.
yes, i like variety.
you see.
come.
you like it?
yes.
look, no country should get water for free.
okay?
the cost of water must go up every day.
text me and tell me how much was the turnover of water in dubai and singapore.
go.
dude, want to talk to you.
what?
come on.
i'll just come.
what are you doing?
i was feeding her.
what are you doing like a sidekick?
what?
you were supposed to propose to her, right?
yes
so why have you brought all them for lunch?
she said we'll get bored if just the two of us have lunch.
that's why she called everyone one by one.
crazy.
when will you propose for marriage?
i will.
get off my back.
are you in a hurry?
you go propose to her.
go.
do two marriages.
go.
come on.
may i?
look, he doesn't have the guts.
eventually, i will have to take...
her responsibility.
get lost.
dude...
hi.
aarav, nikhil is getting married.
i don't know about rajveer.
but when are you getting married?
actually, uncle, i have also chosen a girl.
i just need her approval.
how sweet!
who is she?
don't know.
okay.
i want to meet you.
out.
excuse me.
yes.
excuse me, uncle.
cool, dude.
yes.
why have you called me?
i want to talk to you.
okay.
tell me.
i feel we should get married.
what?
nice.
nice joke.
no, rajveer.
i am serious.
look, sneha, i am not at all as you think i am.
in fact, even i don't know what all i have done to how many girls.
i came to tell you just this yesterday.
but i didn't get the chance.
i don't believe you, rajveer.
you know.
honor is dear to every girl.
and yesterday you saw me...
i didn't see anything.
nothing.
you did.
i swear.
i didn't see anything.
you had opened your eyes from time to time.
no, i didn't.
before i could open them, thanks to anjali's ranting...
i lost the moment.
you didn't want to see?
i didn't.
why?
why didn't you want to see?
because because aarav loves you.
but i love you.
but i don't.
so you want to hear it?
i just wanted to use you.
but you couldn't.
because you love me, rajveer.
that's why when i was taking off my clothes, you had shut your eyes.
you know, rajveer.
this is love.
your love is right in front of you, but you don't realize.
and when this friendship turns into liking this liking into love and love into marriage.
you don't even realize.
look at your eyes.
what?
what's in my eyes?
love.
sorry.
what's wrong?
why are you laughing?
i was just kidding.
seems like you're actually in love with me.
what do you mean?
i was just joking.
idiot.
joking.
relax.
you know.
i don't love you.
what did you think?
i don't know anything about you?
dude, anjali is not just my friend, she is like my sister.
okay.
she had told me everything about you and aarav the first day.
the two of you changed your look, style to woo me.
even behavior.
wow.
what did you think?
you would use me like a tissue.
i did.
hey, rajveer.
relax.
no hard feelings.
okay?
it's a wedding.
fooling around is usual.
you joked with me.
so did i.
we are equal.
no sorry.
no apologies.
okay?
yes?
take care.
yes.
aarav loves me.
genuinely.
okay.
and he is a nice guy.
i also like him.
bye.
funny.
do you know?
why you always wear the wedding ring in this finger?
this finger is for your parents.
this is for your siblings.
this is for your friends.
this is for you.
and this is for your life partner.
and this life partner will never leave you.
how cute!
look over there.
oh god!
oh boy!
7... 8. 1... 2... 3... 4... 5... 6... 7... 8.
1... 2... 3... 4.
looking good.
keep it up.
turn.
hello.
what the hell!
what are you guys doing?
hey, aarav.
what are you guys doing?
i thought this would look better.
you know.
dude, what are you doing?
will you get us disgraced in front of everyone in the 'sangeet' .
do it properly.
come on, pal.
rajveer, why aren't you rehearsing?
couldn't find any dance partner?
no one here is worthy of me.
my band.
am i worthy of you?
he...
wow.
vaishali.
hi.
congratulations.
thank god you came before the wedding.
if you hadn't come today, i would've never, ever spoken to you.
hi.
congratulations.
hi.
thank you.
meet my best friend, sneha.
hi.
and this is nikhil's childhood buddy, aarav.
hey.
this is the other childhood buddy.
rajveer.
hi.
rajveer.
hi.
will you be my dance partner?
as you just said.
i'd love to.
of course.
oh.
what.
thank you.
i wonder what the rascal is going to do to her now.
no.
nothing.
we'll take you.
we'll take you with us on a horse.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away as our bride.
we'll take you.
we'll take you with us on a horse.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away as our bride.
millions would be mesmerized by these mesmeric eyes.
she'll fly away with our hearts secretly.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away in front of everyone.
in front of everyone.
even the moon pales in comparison to our stunning beauty.
even the moon pales in comparison to this stunning beauty.
my heart knows no bounds.
i thank my god.
my wish has come true.
i've found heaven on earth.
millions would be mesmerized by these mesmeric eyes.
she'll fly away with our hearts secretly.
we'll take you.
we'll take you away in front of everyone.
in front of everyone.
hey.
why have you come out leaving the 'sangeet'?
nothing.
i got a bit tense about your wedding and money.
come on, tell me.
i know it's something else.
tell me.
what happened?
i am so baffled.
so many girls came and went.
i have dumped them just like that.
didn't give them a second look.
darn her!
she used me.
this has happened to me for the first time.
and i am feeling this for the first time.
those two...
i am jealous.
i can't bear to see the two of them together.
are you... are you in love with sneha?
what the hell.
where are you going?
to aarav.
are you out of your mind?
we'll have to tell him everything.
how long are we going to keep fooling him?
but listen...
sir, you gave us seven days time.
this is just the fourth day, sir.
did i say anything?
did i ask for money from you?
i have come here to ask from someone else.
look, sir, you'll get your money.
once our friend aarav gets married.
who is your third friend?
you mean i won't get the money till he gets married?
is that so?
actually, we friends have bought 1 lakh shares of reliance a few years ago.
and we had signed this contract that this 1 lakh will belong to the one who doesn't marry.
all our friends have got married.
it's just the three of us left.
nikhil is getting married.
and we're setting aarav up with a girl to get him married.
yes.
this aarav and stuff is rubbish.
do you know you're movie stars?
that in the end, you'll kill the villain and take the heroine away.
as if you own it?
you still have three more days.
i want my money within three days.
or you shoot yourselves.
i don't have time even for that.
understood?
see you.
what are you looking at?
now i know how come this dog changed.
you call me a friend.
you call me a friend, don't you?
then why didn't you tell me?
you should've told me once.
i would've sold my father's house to save you.
let alone the stocks.
do you know why i call you a dog?
because a dog is loyal.
you rascal.
ever since childhood, you've fought with me with loyalty, right?
so why now?
why now?
because your thinking is like a dog's tail.
you'll always think in a crooked manner.
get off.
you are worse than him.
there is no abuse for you even in the dictionary.
he didn't tell me anything.
i can understand.
he just doesn't trust me.
but you, nikhil.
you.
why did you not tell me?
you were setting me up with sneha and vaishali for those mere stocks.
look.
look, don't get too emotional.
whatever he has done is for the wedding.
i swear your wedding will not happen.
this guy has put me in trouble.
he has put you in trouble.
and when i put you in trouble, you'll realize what pain is.
i will not get married.
i am not signing the stock papers.
do whatever you can.
rascals.
to hell with you.
to hell with him.
to hell with your wedding.
and to hell with this friendship.
i am going.
to tell father and anjali's father everything.
we will see whatever happens.
if they want to help us, they will help us.
otherwise...
whatever god wills.
hold on.
are you sure?
no.
i don't care.
no matter how much loss i incur.
one crore.
two crores.
i just don't care.
tell that man to withdraw the case.
that's it.
don't give me useless suggestions.
he is already tense.
i want to run the company and not lead it to bankruptcy.
we shouldn't give him more stress.
just do as i say.
let's go.
you are right.
you got it?
let's go.
hey, boys.
yes.
why are you leaving?
come
have a seat.
sit.
anyway, what's the matter?
no, father.
you seem tense.
pests and flies were found in our soft drink gypsy
the man who was sipping it has filed a suit of 50 crores against our company.
scoundrel.
anyway, i will have to go to india for the settlement.
will you guys do one thing?
yes.
tell me, uncle.
just a moment.
this is cash.
two crores.
i am going to india for the settlement.
will you keep it safely till then?
yes, father.
look, this money is for the hotel bills and the marriage expenses.
if my wife or daughter gets hold of it they will splurge it on shopping.
okay?
keep it safely.
what?
don't even think of it.
look, listen to me.
i have a brilliant idea.
brilliant idea?
last time you played stocks.
i am still suffering because of it.
i am not saying to invest it in stocks.
so?
spl.
spl?
have you gone crazy?
you will invest money in spl?
nowadays even beggars invest money in spl.
why can't we?
two crores will become 20 crores in a jiffy.
in an instant.
as it is, only two days are left for the semi-finals and finals.
look, listen to me.
we have no other option right now.
please.
we have an option.
i will go and give this money to gutka king.
that's the only option.
what do you think?
gutka king is a bank.
you will keep depositing money.
even if you give him two crores will he forget the rest of the money?
even if he lets go of it what will you tell uncle when he returns?
what about my marriage?
what marriage are you talking about, nikhil?
the marriage that can't take place.
will gutka king let you get married?
please.
think about it calmly.
this is the last option we have.
20 crores can change our lives.
not 20.
two crores.
two will multiply into 20.
think.
one last gamble.
last time.
please.
trust me.
'welcome to the exciting match... ' '... between the two teams from the south.'
'chennai and hyderabad.'
baba, rajveer.
yes.
tell me.
what's the rate?
70-75.
chennai favorite.
'that's a very quick shot to the boundary.'
'and another one to mid-wicket.'
bet 50 lakhs on hyderabad.
yes.
fine.
'it's really tense out there.'
'that's gone.
that's a good wicket.'
'things look really good for chennai.'
'that will be close.
the umpire's called for the third umpire.
yes!
'out!
'chennai's are going wild.'
wow!
yes. 1.5 crores on chennai.
why on chennai?
they are winning.
leave it to me.
i know the game is going to change.
nikhil, please.
trust me.
yes.
yeah!
'good shot.'
come on.
yes!
nikhil, see this.
baby, please.
later.
honeymoon's dress.
we have still not got married.
oh, no.
you have gone crazy.
'good shot.
very good shot.'
we lost 10.
oh, no.
you guys are gambling?
she is unlucky.
get rid of her.
yes, baby.
leave.
forget it.
move from the front.
'... doing it really well.'
out!
yes!
look.
yeah!
we did it, dude!
yes!
hi.
listen, this is rajveer.
yes.
tell me.
who is the favorite?
bangalore.
at the rate of 80 bet one crore on bangalore.
'that's a glorious shot, covers for boundary.'
'a beautiful start for the mumbai team.'
'that's very close.
will it be catch or run out?
yes!
'the batsman runs between the wickets.'
'there's a huge appeal.'
'for the umpire this is going to be very tough.'
out!
yes!
control it!
'a huge score for the mumbai team.'
yes!
'oh my, god.
that's huge.'
six!
wow.
i told you.
yes!
that's a huge turn around in the play.
come on.
yes!
six!
it looks like a one way traffic the bangalore boys are not going to leave it.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
bangalore is the favorite. 50.
i bet two crores on mumbai.
rajveer, have you gone crazy?
nikhil.
what are you doing?
nikhil, trust me.
bangalore is playing well.
why are you betting on mumbai?
trust me.
i know the game will change again.
there's another one over square leg for six.
it's a catch.
what did i tell you?
caught at the boundary rope.
hi.
what's going on?
who is playing?
yes!
out!
'right at the boundary.'
out!
yes!
wow!
yes!
no matter what you say.
she is lucky for you, man.
she is lucky, dude.
unbelievable performance.
what happened?
get me that girl.
i want her.
please.
i want her.
am i a pimp?
so become one.
total is three crores 40 lakhs.
until now, we have made three crores 40 lakhs from two matches.
your father-in-law's two crores.
five crores 40 lakhs.
now, we will bet five crores 40 lakhs on mumbai.
this time we won't flip.
only mumbai.
right till the end.
welcome to the big day.
mumbai versus chennai.
the best game of the competition.
that's a beautiful boundary through fine leg.
chennai has got a good start.
and that's a huge six...
out.
what a delivery outside the off stump.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
what's the rate?
mumbai is the favorite. 45-50.
i don't want to bet now.
this is a huge turnaround by the...
bold.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
mumbai is the favorite. 65-68.
i don't want to bet now.
it's such a tight game.
nikhil, i know what i am doing.
beautiful pull shot.
that's a beautiful shot.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
tell me.
what's the rate?
mumbai is the favorite. 79-80.
no.
not now.
have you gone crazy?
chennai is trying to get a six.
that's a huge six.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
mumbai. 90-95.
not now.
rajveer, this is...
looks very unlikely.
but...
oh, no.
that's bold.
baba, rajveer.
yes.
chennai favorite. 65-70.
do you want to bet or not?
tell me quickly.
five crores 40 lakhs on mumbai.
yes.
fine.
we need a miracle.'
'good performance by one of their key players.'
'that's another boundary, that's beautifully played.'
'six.'
take it.
out.
this match has been turning around every over.
that's a boundary.
no.
that's out.
that's such a huge turnover.
the crowd cannot believe it.
four.
scoundrel.
bet.
bet more on mumbai.
is that a six or is it going to be out?
that's really high.
what a brilliant catch!
oh, my god.
another brilliant catch.
this is just...
why is this stupid changing the batting order?
nobody expected mumbai to do...
there it is.
out.
chennai are the champions of this tournament
look at the scene.
dancing.
oh, my god.
unbelievable performance!
fireworks are on.
where are you taking me, anjali?
lights.
it's so beautiful.
finally, we are getting married tomorrow.
i am so happy.
i love you.
you did it.
i am so happy, nikhil.
thank you so much.
first you brought my wedding dress.
and now, all this.
you know?
this is how i had always imagined my marriage.
you made my dream come true.
aarav, if i had not invited you for my marriage i wouldn't have got to see all this.
you know what?
you are right.
if i had not come for the marriage i also wouldn't have got to see all this.
thank you so much.
thank you.
nikhil.
fire.
nikhil, run.
nikhil, go back.
baby.
it's okay.
mother.
enough, dear.
mother, the marriage can't take place.
don't cry.
the entire dais got burnt.
my dress also got burnt.
enough, dear.
it's inauspicious for it to get burnt.
quiet.
anjali.
excuse me.
sir, we need to call the police.
the damage is too much.
no need to call the police.
i will pay for the damages.
i will meet you in the office.
okay?
please.
okay, sir.
let's go.
son.
i gave you two crores.
use it to pay the hotel for the damages.
okay?
go.
uncle...
your two crores... got expended.
what?
actually, i had borrowed five crores from someone.
i invested it in the stock market.
to repay eight crores, i invested your two crores in spl.
you embezzled my father's money.
you gambled.
scoundrel.
how could you do this?
because of you my marriage got ruined.
shut up.
just shut up.
nikhil.
you cry all the time.
you have made a spectacle of this marriage.
all the time, my marriage.
my wedding dress.
my this.
my that.
i, me, myself.
where am i in all this?
where are we?
i know rajveer made a mistake.
but today when his life is in danger, what should i do?
should i leave him alone?
should i let him die?
and you, what do you think?
you are everything for me?
nikhil.
they are nothing?
please.
don't say that.
he is my friend.
he is my brother.
i won't let him die alone.
listen...
let anything happen.
i am with him.
what are you saying, nikhil?
anjali, i am solely responsible for whatever happened.
i apologize to you and everybody else.
i am really sorry.
so you set this fire?
what?
not deliberately.
it happened by mistake.
i...
nikhil, i swear it was an accident.
forget the money part.
what was done was done.
assume that it's the price for leaving my daughter.
father.
uncle, please.
you...
uncle.
brother.
brother, listen to me.
the marriage is off.
what are you saying?
we are returning to india tomorrow.
you are calling off the marriage?
what are you doing?
good you showed your true colors.
otherwise i would have really fallen in love with you.
you had already broken friendship.
today, you broke his marriage as well.
i don't know why my eyes search for you in every path.
whatever was in the past still exists.
i am also standing here.
where are you?
beloved, if you had to break my heart.
why did you fall in love with me?
beloved, come once.
beloved.
she was a glass doll.
she fell in love with a stony heart.
she broke in such a way.
nothing was in her hand.
my heart searches there.
where we had exchanged promises.
where we had bowed our head in prayer.
today, i am still alone at the same place.
beloved, if you had to break my heart.
why did you fall in love with me?
beloved, come once.
beloved.
beloved, if you had to break my heart.
why did you fall in love with me?
beloved, come once.
beloved.
you will shoot?
or should i start chewing your tobacco?
before chewing the tobacco, remember one thing.
the packet will cost rs. 2.
cash.
if not that...
talk respectfully.
i will shoot you.
shoot.
he is not alone.
what are you doing here?
they seem close.
bring the dwarf out.
aarav.
you... you...
what are you doing over here?
i am having tobacco.
but...
you should have told me that the money is with him.
i would have picked him up.
i wouldn't have to get him married.
i wouldn't have to get your stock paper signed.
one bullet and two targets.
he would have died and you would have stayed single.
first money would have gone to you.
and then in my hands.
yes?
brother...
will you sign or should i give you some more tobacco.
no, brother.
no.
i cannot have anymore tobacco.
give it to me, brother.
i will sign it.
just a minute, aarav.
wait.
both of you have already done a lot for me.
not only done a lot, but endured a lot as well.
not anymore.
once i am gone, all the problems will be over.
wait.
let me talk to him.
rajveer, do you know what your problem is?
you never understood me.
you never understood our friendship.
no matter how much we fight, quarrel...
no matter how much we mess with each other...
but no outsider can do that.
you couldn't understand such a small thing.
give it to me, brother.
i will sign it.
distribute whatever is left among these poor guys.
listen.
the rs. 8 crores that you are giving isn't a favour.
you had taken money on credit.
this isn't aims.
it belongs to me and you are giving it back.
got it?
and listen without turning back...
don't turn back, give a look like a hero once you reach outside the door.
otherwise, the door will close forever.
got it?
go.
what are you thinking about?
are you waiting for his daughter's wedding?
come on, let's leave.
mr. mittal, don't break off this marriage and leave.
what?
uncle mittal, whatever happened was our fault.
not nikhil's.
and we are extremely sorry for that.
but please, don't punish anjali and nikhil for our mistake.
please.
these are some share certificates.
what?
compensation for whatever loss you have suffered.
please, uncle.
please don't say no.
uncle, please.
where is he?
he is the groom.
he is getting ready.
don't you want to get married?
madam, where are you going?
rajveer, let me go.
for the time being, you will have to come with me.
but...
just a minute, anjali. - but, rajveer, i want to meet nikhil.
sorry, this isn't ravi shankar jaiswal's dress.
no.
it's beautiful.
you know anjali there was a time i was completely against this wedding.
i kept telling nikhil, do whatever you want.
do it and finish the job.
sorry for my language.
but i was wrong.
you know, rajveer, the act that you put up that you care a darn for anyone...
it is all utter nonsense.
what you are doing today is your real character.
thanks, rajveer.
i am so happy.
love you.
you are looking beautiful.
have a look.
what is this?
brother rajveer told me to do so.
first pinch and then give this.
okay.
hey.
come.
come here.
hey, what are you doing?
what way is this?
you used 50 new tricks while flirting.
and you completely goof-up while proposing.
goof-up?
but...
listen, rajveer, let's do this nicely.
come on, get down on your knees.
knees?
get down on your knees.
come on.
sneha, someone might see us.
rajveer, why are you thinking so much?
someone might see us.
get down on your knees.
come on.
hold this.
what is this?
rakhi .
a ring.
a ring?
you sent it.
me?
rajveer!
just a minute.
i didn't send any ring.
you are just too much.
i agree that you didn't send this ring.
but you had at least put it on her.
aarav.
if you can send flowers for me, can't i send a ring?
this...
me.
you guys.
by the power vested in me, i now pronounce you, man and wife.
kiss the bride.
listen.
you know what?
just off.
stop.
have you come with the wedding procession?
or are you here to get some charity?
is this how a wedding procession looks like?
there is no band, no song, no music.
we are crazy about your beauty.
let us come in.
go away, romeo.
we have seen many like you.
we are crazy about your beauty.
let us come in.
go away, romeo.
we have seen many like you.
let me be in your arms.
for eternity.
life feels like heaven in your arms.
now i will take you away.
son...
what is wrong with him?
what are you doing?
nikhil.
give him a divorce.
listen.
i have never got a girl.
i am 28 years old and still single.
are you proposing to me?
i didn't tell you?
no.
that's what i have been trying to do since so long.
you won't run away, will you?
you won't scold me?
i had never even in my dreams thought that i will fall in love with someone.
sneha.
father.
father is also here?
this is a great miracle.
father.
doomed!
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you are my life, dear.
i've given my heart to you, dear.
you make the world smile.
happiness lies in you.
whatever you say calms my heart down.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
my thoughts stay occupied by you.
my desire has brought me close to your desire.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
i keep you close to my heart.
i stop breathing when i think of you.
i keep chanting your name.
best watched using open subtitles mkv player
__file_terminal__
so why am i not trusted to investigate this case?
we decided to get an experienced detective to back you up.
an experienced detective?
not to take charge, just to help you out.
i know these people i was there when i was a kid.
that should speed things up.
i need your experience.
this is more than just an accident.
some dynamite and a detonator were stolen.
it was at least one full box.
lauga said she saw the moon of urd.
excuse me.
have you started you own investigation?
no, i just...
just to make it clear, i'm leading this investigaion.
that's clear.
there are no explanations.
there is always an explanation.
they were off work for the weekend.
we have no idea what snorri was doing there.
it was sabotage, nothing else.
you can pay off a lot of debt with that.
are you accusing me of trying to get insurance money... by injuring my son?
i have got nothing against snorri, but his father is an arsehole.
larus!
and then he blames me for the accident.
why?
he wants me bankrupt.
where the hell were you?
i kept calling you.
i lost the damn phone.
these people chain themselves to the machines to stall the project.
they've got the dog sniffing around.
this is political persecution.
mom is hoping that.
you find a woman.
hi helgi.
it's marin.
i'm waiting for you at the cinema.
the commissioner has decided that work can start at the cliff tomorrow.
doesn't anyone give a damn?
isn't the boy with you?
so how are you feeling, helgi?
i'm fine.
no one's fine who has to bury his child.
so you know the names of all the elves and ghosts.
no.
i don't.
but i would not have taken that rock.
we'll try to wake him in two days.
code blue in number seven!
one milligram of adrenalin.
helgi!
yes.
i'm coming.
what's going on?
the boy in the digger is dead.
what happened?
cardiac arrest.
is that normal?
you never know when people are so severely injured.
the body is under a lot of pressure.
the post mortem might shed some light on it.
weren't you going to wake him up tomorrow?
yes.
that was the plan.
but there was someone else there who stole the explosives.
that's a different matter.
it's being investigated.
we'll close this as an accident so people can go back to work.
we don't think this was an accident.
the only thing you have is the phone call that snorri couldn't have made, right?
it's almost impossible.
almost?
what do you mean?
every day costs a fortune.
the contractor is paying daily fines and the powerline team is being held back.
from when he put the phone down he had fifty seconds to do everything and that's not possible.
with all due respect for you and
inga.
yes.
inga.
i'll talk to the commissioner and he'll make a decision.
okay.
just do what you have to do.
we've authorised the autopsy.
they found snorri's necklace on the floor.
...lt must have fallen when they tried to resuscitate him last night.
it's not his.
i've got his here.
this is the same medal.
do you know why it's been snapped in half?
we were discussing that.
he said he gave one half to somebody.
he and larus were always going to horse tournaments.
snorri usually got first prize and lárus came second or third.
something happened to larus's horse.
snorri felt that he should have won.
i think he gave larus the other half.
did he visit snorri at the hospital?
no, not as far as i'm aware.
do you have any idea who might have brought this?
no.
did you tell anyone that snorri was supposed to be woken up today?
yes.
veigar.
you don't think there was someone who didn't want him to wake up?
of course.
if someone was afraid of what he might say.
anna knew.
she could have told larus.
veigar, you don't think that larus?
i don't know.
do you?
what are you thinking?
i'm helping you out...
with the investigation that you helped stop yesterday.
it wasn't my decision.
besides, things have changed.
snorri is dead and someone brought the second half of the medal.
do you think the investigation will continue?
yes.
i spoke to the chief and he talked to the commissioner.
the explosives have not yet been found.
we'll continue.
we?
you.
this is your case.
eydis is my friend.
you're too close to these people.
i was walking down the hallway and saw a woman going to the icu.
are you sure it was a woman?
yes.
i know the difference.
what time was this?
around 11.30, midnight.
are you sure about the time?
yes.
i went to get a trolley that had been left behind.
can you describe this woman?
yes.
she was in a hurry.
she was wearing a light-coloured coat.
she was coming out of the lift when i was on my way there.
how tall was she?
hair colour?
it was a young woman.
medium height.
dark blond hair.
did you see her go into the icu?
no.
the lift was open so i walked straight in.
are you looking for halldora?
yes.
we are from the police.
i see.
dora hasn't been home since yesterday.
she had a bag so i guess she was going away somewhere.
did she say where?
no.
we don't talk much... but this place is not sound-proof so we do hear each other a bit.
does she live here alone?
yes.
during the day anyway.
want to go inside?
i have a key.
she's my tenant.
no thanks ask her to get in touch if you see her.
do you know if she was home last friday night?
yes.
she even came back early.
around midnight.
what followed was no massage.
so there was somebody with her?
i didn't really see him but i heard them.
do you know who it was?
no.
i woke up in the middle of the night and saw him drive away.
did you see what sort of car it was?
a grey pick-up.
do you remember when this was?
around 2 am.
excuse me.
do you live here as well?
yes.
upstairs.
do you want to come in?
no.
what did this man look like?
did you see anything?
no, i just saw him speed away.
yes.
okay.
helgi!
listen my son hurt himself at the kindergarten so i have to go.
i'm coming.
thank you for your time.
goodbye.
any news from the autopsy?
the autopsy?
we don't have a final report.
just cardiac arrest.
no injuries that are not related to the accident.
so the person that brought the medal didn't do anything else?
it doesn't look like it.
there's a meeting in half an hour.
orri.
the boy is dead and it may be a murder case.
they sent a man from reykjavik to work with me.
he's waiting.
can't he take care of it alone?
today i mean?
i'm under close scrutiny.
don't you get it.
listen...
i'll call my mum and you'll take him there when he's been checked out at the clinic.
all the candidates will be there.
just go then.
i have to go.
helgi.
i have to take him to the clinic.
that's no problem.
it's on the way.
alright.
i'll see you there.
he's got a small bump on the neck but otherwise he's fine.
great.
you visited snorri at the hospital last night, didn't you?
yes.
i dropped by.
when was that?
around midnight?
no.
much earlier.
around eight.
did you stay long?
about an hour.
i must have left just after nine.
do you remember what sort of jacket you were wearing?
jacket?
a simple, light-coloured jacket from zara.
do you recognise this?
yes.
this is a medal that snorri always wore.
do you happen to know who owns the other half?
no, i...
could it be larus?
no, no.
larus doesn't own anything like this.
inga showing people evidence doesn't get us anywhere unless we are conducting a proper interrogation.
she was really taken aback when she saw the medal ...but if i was going to make sure that snorri didn't wake up i wouldn't leave something behind that could be linked to me.
unless you wanted to direct suspicion towards someone else.
can you, please?
yes.
oh, god.
i'm sorry.
it's okay.
i didn't mean to.
it's okay.
i have to take him to his grandma.
shall we try halldora again later?
yes.
shall we say around 2?
yes.
i was wondering if you recognised this phone number 929-2279.
you're wasting your time.
we're in rural iceland.
a bit of jealousy and envy is normal.
this was an accident and i don't want my son's memory to be linked to a crime or a murder case.
have you seen this?
digger operator murdered?
no.
these hacks only want to create headlines that sell.
i don't know where the paper got this from.
they're making it up.
you should stop it.
it doesn't matter what you find.
he's dead... and i just want to be left in peace to give him a beautiful funeral.
it's not my decision.
you write the report.
inga writes the report.
but you can have a say in it.
i can't stop the investigation.
inga's in control.
i was wondering, would it be alright if i had a look at snorri's room?
you like her.
who?
this woman.
inga?
no, no.
first of all she's married and secondly i'm not attracted to her.
fine.
but it suits you.
it's my old room.
you know your way.
halldora reynisdottir?
yes.
we're from the police.
can we come in and talk for a minute?
i don't believe it.
had you been seeing each other for long?
almost a year.
but it wasn't working.
i didn't want to live on a farm and he couldn't imagine living anywhere else.
did you see snorri on the night of the accident?
no, i was at a friend's house.
i was home in bed by midnight.
alone?
yes.
what's your friend's name?
bara...
where does she live?
geirsdottir?
birkivellir 4.
did you visit snorri in the hospital?
no, i'm afraid not.
i couldn't cope.
and i wasn't really welcome there.
why not?
his parents don't speak to me.
they always thought i was stealing their only son.
where were you last night?
yesterday?
yes.
hermann downstairs said that you went away.
i was with my sister, in reykjavik.
can we verify that.
rosa.
raudalaekur 53.
didn't you hear about it on the radio?
no.
you didn't see the papers?
no.
i'm just hearing this now.
excuse me.
i'm going to get the phone.
did you tell us where you were this morning?
yes.
at my sister's.
i can see that you've marked the day in your calendar.
that's not any of your business.
i run a massage parlour.
now i want you to go.
what are you doing here?
i'm just trying to fix the radiator.
didn't you do that yesterday?
yes, but it's broken.
not my fault.
do you recognise the number 9292279?
no.
are you sure?
yes.
that's all.
were you wearing this jacket last night?
yes, so what?
thanks.
can i have a massage?
no, hermann.
no.
but the circle is growing bigger if anything.
you need to get to the bottom of this soon.
we'd get this done quicker if we had more people on the case.
helgi, you know that the budget does not allow it.
have they found the person that the mother saw?
not yet.
you must speed things up.
i'll speak to you later.
bye.
i've started printing things out and i booked two rooms for us if we wanted to stay here.
okay.
shall we go over this.
dora.
yes, she's hiding something.
she knew who's phone number it was.
she's also lying about being alone because hermann heard someone.
he saw the grey pick-up drive away at 2 am so if we assume that snorri was in the car he must have been heading straight for the cliff.
but why?
and why is dora lying?
maybe they were arguing and he stormed out.
yes, but we can pretty much rule out suicide because there was probably someone else by the cliff.
dora does not have a record and the bar and parlour are clean.
i'm still wondering why she'd marked today on the calendar.
could she have known that they were waking snorri?
no.
it could have been anything.
larus.
he doesn't have any alibi and the lighter that we found by the cliff... is probably his.
and he's a competitor.
this medal.
eydis and veigar say that larus got this half but anna denies that.
i think we should look into this more.
find out if anything suspicious happened at the hospital.
there was nothing suspicious.
it was just cardiac arrest.
have you seen the autopsy report?
no, but we should wait with this.
yes, let's keep it open.
anna.
she and snorri used to be a couple.
what?
i found this letter here.
dear snorri.
i don't know what to say but i want to say so much.
my heart hurts.
we shared so many moments.
then it says down here.
this is something we'll always have together and can't be destroyed.
where did you get this?
in snorri's room.
it's from when they were teenagers.
backstreet boys.
this is robbie williams, right here.
no, he was in take that.
so they were a couple.
shouldn't we go to this meeting tonight?
no.
orri will be there and i know exactly what he'll be saying.
my towering, beautiful cliff!
excuse me.
what are you doing here?
what?
isn't anyone free to park here?
you're aware that all work in the area is banned.
yes.
i was told that they were starting again tomorrow and then i'm supposed to be blowing up the cliff.
you will not be doing anything until they've lifted the ban.
is that clear?
yes.
una!
what?
i'll go speak to him.
you are una, aren't you?
yes.
i'm in your books.
i climbed up the mast down there.
i see.
do you think this place will be flooded?
that's what they want.
this has to be stopped.
they cannot commit more environmental murders.
fucking industry.
do you know snorri?
he has sometimes given me a lift home from dances.
if he's not with dora.
he always drives.
he doesn't drink.
what about last night.
i got a lift with ulfur.
on the bike.
let's go.
aslaug.
hello!
even though i'm old, and the house too, it's not a museum for tourists.
my name is inga aradottir and...
yes.
i know who you are.
but what you are doing here.
i came to see you.
no one came to the door and it was open so i thought something had happened.
you hardly thought i was lying dead in a locked room?
no.
well.
i'm going to make some coffee.
come on.
ulfur had been coming here so often to help me out that i offered him that room.
he doesn't get along with his brother.
is everyone happy about him seeing that girl?
aren't you worried that she might get pregnant?
from my experience nothing is more remarkable than when two people truly love each other.
that's rare and i don't intend to spoil it.
weren't anna and snorri a couple once?
who says that?
they were, weren't they?
snorri was a good boy.
he couldn't help the way his father is.
ladies and gentlemen.
although we are all devastated by this accident we must not let grief make us lose sight of our common goal of giving this region a better future.
i know i speak for many when i say that it's important that this job is on schedule.
otherwise plans to strengthen energy distribution all around the country could be jeopardised.
where does this region then stand, with regards to employment?
thank you.
where is your stuff?
i don't think we should go.
how am i supposed to catch the bus?
i just think it is a bit lame to be leaving now.
you never have the courage to do anything anyway.
even if people deny it in public, everyone knows this line is the beginning of their next project to build a hydro-electric plant in this region.
this line will destroy the cliff, the dam will flood the waterfalls.
this will put an end to all tourism in the area.
that's right!
thank you.
i've told you where the explosives are and you can read all about how to do this on the internet.
i'm not that into you.
do you think i enjoy having sex with you in that stupid room at this old woman's house?
cut it out, una.
una.
come on.
una!
una...
una!
una...
una!
i know the cliff well enough to know that there will be no rest unless we make peace with those who live there.
i suggest that we put all work in the area on hold and set up a meeting with a medium ...or someone who can contact someone on the other side.
let's vote on this proposal.
those who agree raise their hand.
hi, what's up?
we're at home going over things after the meeting.
will you be long?
no, but we'll go on for a bit.
are you staying up there tonight?
i don't know.
is olof there?
yes.
is she there!
of course.
so what.
just wondering.
you know me better than that!
yes.
i'll speak to you later.
bye.
and what does this mean?
well, it means that snorri went into cardiac arrest about an hour after his last dose of medication.
according to the day plan and the medication record there was nothing unusual about this dose.
i see.
are you coming back tonight?
no, i'm staying.
when are you coming?
i don't know.
you can tell me if you just want to forget about this.
marin.
i'm working.
okay.
we'll be in touch.
okay.
damn, you're lame.
hi.
i thought you'd gone home.
no, i thought you were going back to reykjavik.
did you go to the meeting?
orri did well.
i met lauga.
how was that?
good.
i saw a really cute picture of you and eydis.
really?
first love?
they decided to get a medium to make a deal with the hidden people about finishing this.
have you tried the hotel bar?
no.
shall we?
yes.
didn't you go abroad to study after you finished the academy?
yes.
fbi?
no.
but i did a one-week ...fingerprint course there once.
okay.
i studied in sweden.
malmo.
it was good.
that's great.
really great.
this is a nice place.
and when will we be paid for the land.
next year.
it's always paid afterwards.
that's if we haven't lost the land.
when did you last make a payment on the loan?
they're threatening us with repossession.
veigar.
you have to make a deal with larus about the digger...
i've already done it he's starting tomorrow.
we don't get the first payment until we have finished.
i'll end up having to hand over the job.
damn lauga has cursed us.
since when do you believe in that sort of thing?
what the hell are you supposed to believe?
our most valuable horse dies.
my hand keeps getting worse.
then the boy kills himself.
don't say that.
it isn't true.
so what the hell was he doing there in the middle of the night?
and that damned slut from the bar, with the massage parlour.
and it doesn't help how you've been acting.
always listening to his whining.
you let him feel sorry for himself until he gave up.
so, have you and marin been together for long?
we are not together.
no, why did you think that?
i don't know.
i just...
was someone talking about it?
no, we're just friends.
will you not have to move to reykjavik when orri becomes an mp?
have you applied for a job?
yes.
but i haven't heard anything.
thanks again for today.
no problem.
how's he doing?
fine.
cute boy.
yes.
he's adorable.
i don't understand how you can do this.
what?
i don't know what i would do if i lost valur.
life goes on.
that's they way it is.
what?
are you sleeping outside?
it's cold.
come on.
come inside.
what's wrong with you?
come inside.
did you see this, ulfur?
what?
no, i just heard a noise.
is everything alright?
mum?
is dad going to work at the cliff tomorrow?
yes... now he finally gets a chance to use his fancy digger.
but it's dangerous.
no, it isn't.
daddy is always careful.
remember, he went to the school.
the car will be completely crushed.
no, sweetheart.
you just had a bad dream
no.
yes.
come on.
it's all going to be fine.
let's try to get some sleep.
have you seen my boots?
no, are they not there?
has ulfur taken them again?
no, no.
but aren't you just getting in the digger anyway?
it's really muddy there.
if you see ulfur tell him that hildur is looking for una.
yes.
be careful.
nonni had a bad dream last night.
have you been up for long?
about the plan on the medication doses and the autopsy report.
it confirms that he died of his injuries.
it could also mean that someone wanted it to look that way.
what do you mean?
potassium.
he was getting potassium intravenously.
isn't that normal?
yes, but wait.
potassium is necessary in small doses but if you get too much you have a heart attack because the system can't cope.
but there wasn't too much.
no, but you wouldn't see it.
potassium leaves the body in 12 to 24 hours and after that it's impossible to trace.
this is really far-fetched.
how do you know these things?
some biochemical course i took in malmo.
what's that?
that footprint on the running board was compressor oil.
and it wasn't snorri's footprint.
the only place where this oil could be found in so much quantity was inside the digger so it confirms there was a third person that went into the pickup.
and he'd previously been in the digger and must have called the unregistered number.
did you have this compared?
yes.
great.
inga.
yes.
we'll be there.
bye.
have you seen daddy's boots?
where are they?
under my bed.
helga.
it will be fine as long as he isn't wearing the boots.
leave me alone!
protect the cliff!
...protect the cliff!
protect the cliff!
you have to clean up in this area.
gunnar in holt helps these scum and if he brings them up here again i insist that you arrest him.
relax.
we have it all under control.
under control!
are you completely blind, god dammit?
boys!
coffee!
robert.
still.
robert robert, bring the glove.
come here robert.
nonni dear.
i saw ulfur earlier.
he's on his way here.
will you ask him to call hildur?
okay.
are you alright, sweetheart?
yes.
bye helga.
see you later.
robert.
come on.
robert, come eat.
come!
what's wrong with this dog?
what the hell?
yes.
hey!
what does he want?
get out of the car!
what does he want?
watch out!
get out of the car!
__file_terminal__
this is something more than an accident at work.
someone stole explosives and devices to use them.
we don't have detailed information but it was at least one box.
old lauga who lives at fell said she saw a ball of light.
what, are you conducting this investigation?
just so you know it, i'm in charge here.
yes, i know.
there is no explanation...
there is always an explanation.
no one was working.
everybody had the weekend off.
we don't know what snorri was doing there.
it was sabotage and nothing else.
you can pay off a lot of debts for...
are you accusing me of insurance fraud?
by injuring my son!
i don't dislike snorri.
but his father is an idiot.
lalli...
he blames me for the accident.
why?
he wants me bankrupt.
where the hell were you?
i called and called.
i lost the phone.
what is happening?
the guy is dead.
there was someone else there.
someone stole the explosives.
that's a different case.
we are investigating it.
we close this case as an accident.
they have to be able to work there.
we don't think it was an accident.
they found his necklace on the floor.
maybe it fell off when they tried to resuscitate him.
that's not his.
i've got it.
did you tell someone they were going to wake snorri up today?
yes.
do you think someone didn't want him to wake up?
our most expensive horse dies, my hand is getting worse.
and then the boy kills himself.
don't.
you know that isn't true.
what the hell was he then doing there in the middle of the night?
halldóra reynisdóttir?
yes.
we are from the police.
had you been going out for a long time?
nearly a year.
it wasn't working though.
it was an accident.
i don't want the memory of my son tarnished by having him associated with some crime or a murder case.
did you see this?
those journalists only want headlines which sell.
here is the letter.
my dear snorri.
i don't know what to say but still i want to say so much.
i feel terrible.
you know we had so much time together.
una.
did you know snorri?
i've told you where the explosives are.
you can find all the information on the internet.
leave me alone!
this powerline will destroy the cliff.
the waterfalls will be underwater.
this will destroy tourism in the area.
we have this under control.
control?
are you blind?
the car crashed.
no, darling.
you just had a nightmare.
no.
the cliff
if this isn't just incredibly unlucky
i don't know what it is.
he had been drilling there.
it could have loosened bit by bit.
possibly.
strange though that it happened while there was no work going on.
unless someone helped.
nobody does it by using their hands.
it's many tons.
sorry that i kind of slammed the phone on you the other day.
that's all right.
it's uncomfortable sometimes.
i don't know what we are doing.
well?
this is amazing.
a closed box.
let me know when we may take the flag.
yes.
i'm going to finish the witness statements with freyr.
he will be with us today.
hello.
what are you doing?
cool dog.
is it yours?
no, i'm watching it.
this is the dog the explosives guy owned.
he only wants to be with me.
come here.
mum is having a shower.
she was so sad.
yes, because of the accident.
aren't you sad as well?
a bit but mum isn't sad because of the accident.
she is sad because of the picture.
what picture?
this one.
it's your mum, snorri, but who is this?
uncle oddur.
mum's brother.
he also had an accident like this.
his tractor went down the whole hill.
but he didn't die.
mum.
yes.
what are you doing?
what?
what are you doing?
printing.
this is from the phone company.
they discovered that the phonecard with this number was bought here in the area between march and june.
they can't narrow it further down.
we have to find out.
call all the stores and see if you can find any credit-or debitcard receipts.
what?
all the gas stations?
yes.
do you know how many there are in this area?
there is one here on the corner, one on the intersection, one at vellir and there is one, two, three, four...
freyr, you've got nothing better to do.
no.
hello.
i just want to ask him a few questions about what happened this morning.
is that all right?
sure.
did you see someone near the car or on the hill?
yes.
really?
who was that?
the man who pushed the boulder.
pushed the boulder?
did he have an excavator?
no, he just pushed with both hands.
really?
what did he look like?
he was in a very long grey coat and he had something white on his head.
like he had injured himself.
he sees a lot of things.
isn't that right, darling?
was it a shadowy person?
isn't the boy with you?
who?
the one who came with you the other day.
the one in the arsenal-outfit.
there was a cannon here.
don't you remember his outfit?
he was very happy with it.
it reminds him of you.
what's his name?
are you finished?
yes.
thank you.
excuse me.
i'm not sure how i can put this but the thing is that my una, our una, left last night...
hasn't she come home?
we haven't heard from her.
could she be with úlfur?
no, he doesn't know anything about her.
we were wondering if you could...
do you want us to put out a bulletin?
nei, i don't know.
that's maybe a bit...
just look around for her.
yes.
we can't do much unless you want to declare her missing.
yes.
she is probably with a girl she knows in the city.
she just hasn't answered her phone.
here is her number.
we are a bit afraid for her.
she is easily influenced.
maybe she calls us tonight.
let's hope so.
thanks.
what did the boy see?
anything?
yes.
he said he saw a shadowy person in a long coat with bandages around its head push the boulder.
he sees things.
does everybody here see ghosts?
i don't think he knew anything.
will you be attending the funeral?
i'm not sure.
look at this.
lárus?
yes.
smell this.
the same smell as in the footprint in the pickup.
compressor oil.
i want us to get lárus and interview him.
i would to like to know about the phone number.
me too but everything points to lárus so...
there is no way of knowing how long it will take freyr to find out who bought the phonecard.
inga.
yes.
i'm coming.
hi there.
hello.
we found some junk in the fuel tank.
that's it.
a rag.
so we thought as well.
but it is a t-shirt.
look at the edge.
it's burnt.
like someone lit it on fire.
fjölnir cup 2006.
fjölnir?
isn't that a football team in grafarvogur?
yes, i think so.
anything else?
no.
i'll take this.
thank you.
good evening.
didn't freyr call and ask you to find receipts?
yes.
here they are.
great.
i'll take them with me.
yes.
thank you.
aren't you going to the dance?
what dance?
in njálsbúõ.
freyr is playing.
no, i don't think so.
yes, i saw her.
she visited snorri.
what about him?
i don't remember seeing him.
what about this one?
are you talking about her?
yes.
did you see her?
yes, she came here.
are you sure?
yes, i was going into the lift.
hello.
hello, mum.
how are you?
good.
thanks, stína.
you're a lifesaver.
no problem.
i will see you.
are you in pajamas?
yes.
and shoes?
yes.
did stína allow you to wear the shoes?
yes.
one of the nurses is sure she saw dóra here.
she saw her picture.
she is completely sure.
dóra?
we have to talk with her.
yes, but let's wait.
i just found out anna bought the phonecard.
let's arrest lárus as soon as we get a warrant and then we can talk to anna as well.
your call.
yes, i know.
i want us to do it this way.
i will see you tomorrow.
goodbye.
good evening.
i want a number for a guesthouse called holt.
have you got it?
can you connect me?
thank you.
the county council wants the investigation to be quick and therefore we will meet the sheriff tomorrow.
hello, darling
hello.
is he asleep?
we just had a new poll.
we have a 15 percent lead.
stop this.
i'm trying to watch the news.
all those demanding to stop the work...
isn't my hair a bit weird?
a little bit.
it's terribly low to use tragic accidents here...
the sheriff says more people should be called in to investigate the two fatal accidents...
i don't want any.
sorry.
i'm trying to work.
are you?
what's wrong?
i'm trying to work and at the same time you are voting in the council that i'm not doing my job.
it's not like that.
you know that.
we just have to do something about this.
why didn't you answer when i called last night?
someone had turned it off.
i only saw it this morning.
what's the problem?
what is this?
an earring.
i know it's an earring.
whose is it?
i don't know.
ólöf?
maybe.
why?
because i found it under our bed.
what?
oh, yes.
she spilled something on her at the party and went in to clean it.
why did she go into our bedroom to do that?
i don't know.
maybe the bathroom was occupied.
why are you interrogating me?
damn it.
i thought we could have a cozy evening together.
i thought you could be happy for me.
damn.
dad, can i be with you tonight?
mum and bragi are going to the theater.
i can stay at bragi's sister but i rather want to be with you.
call me.
i got the arrest warrant.
good.
let's get it over with tomorrow.
yes.
hello.
i just wanted to thank you for calling last night.
is she all right?
yes.
she is with friends.
that's good.
ashes to ashes, dust to dust.
where are you two going?
us two?
i'm just going home.
snorri isn't sad.
what did you say to her?
nothing.
what do you want?
what the hell do you want?
i'm here.
do something.
it's very strange that he isn't here.
i was sure he was home.
snorri and anna...
they were in love when they were teenagers.
did you know that?
what difference does that make?
none whatsoever.
but it must have created tension.
with snorri and lárus.
she is veigar's daughter.
who?
anna.
she is snorri's halfsister.
what?
they didn't know about it.
but when they started going out together
veigar had to tell them and then they had to split up.
it was very tragic.
they were very much in love.
you know, like young people will.
just come.
you stand there, i'll stand here.
sleeping?
where did you go after the dance?
i told you.
i was falling asleep at the wheel.
so i decided to sleep and slept until morning.
where did you get gas?
you said we were out of gas.
there was a can in the trunk.
do you think i'll believe this?
there wasn't a can in the trunk.
we talked about this.
we can do this.
we're getting there.
we're good together.
hello.
let's pick lárus up tomorrow.
yes...
we have got enough.
the football t-shirt.
they lived in that part of the city.
we have his footprint on the pickup.
the unregistered number was bought by someone at teigur.
when we pick lárus up we can compare the fingerprints with the one on the lighter.
you know he was there.
he knew snorri and veigar were losing the contract.
if that happened he would get it.
so to guarantee it he wanted to damage the excavator.
helgi.
hello.
yes, sorry.
if you got any comments this would be a good time.
it's just somehow too simple.
this case too simple?
i think this is all very obvious.
then snorri surprised him by coming up there.
he and lárus fought and somehow the excavator with snorri in it went over the cliff.
the answer isn't clear.
we can't just decide it is.
i know you care about them.
is that bad?
so you say the hidden people caused the accident and killed snorri in the hospital?
not at all but the hidden people warn us.
the land is a living being and it defends itself when we attack it as we have always done.
the hidden people know it but can't stop it.
jón, the little boy at teigur sees all kinds of things.
he says he saw a man in a long grey coat with bandages on his head push a boulder off the cliff.
that must have been my grandfather's brother, ásegir.
who's ásgeir?
follow me.
this is ásgeir he lived here.
he had an accident.
he slipped on ice when he was looking for sheep.
the next morning he woke up under the cliff.
he never knew how he got there.
a cloth like this had never been seen here until ásgeir came with it bandaged around his head and covered in blood.
it's been in the family since.
ásgeir forbade us to cut the grass near the cliff and said the cliff should never be touched.
those who are sensitive see many things.
well, helgi.
you are probably needed elswhere.
and you should listen to anna's little boy.
away with you.
i'm going.
excuse me.
can i talk to you?
stop.
what happened?
there was a man here and when i wanted to talk to him he ran away and i couldn't catch him.
he had a backpack full of something,
i saw where he was coming from and someone had broken in.
see.
i don't know what has been stolen but it looks like something was here in this box.
strange that this wheel is covered.
yes.
let me take a look.
what?
don't touch this.
we have to go in and clean this up.
all right?
yes.
let me see.
am i hurting you?
investigation going nowhere.
hello.
it's obvious that explosives have been kept in the box.
dynamite must have fallen out of the backpack when inga fought the man.
we should have found this the other day.
the same type as was stolen from veigar up at the cliff.
the people who live here and some of the workers have access to this storage room.
nobody here is going to break in.
we are looking for someone who knew about the explosives.
but doesn't have a key.
we're good together.
how are you?
fine.
i'm worried about you.
i'm fine.
i care about us.
me too.
i just can't help it.
hello.
how are you?
fine.
how's the wound?
fine.
shouldn't we get started?
yes.
we are finished.
is he with you?
ólafur.
i'm going to talk to hildur and gunnar.
i'll be right out.
great.
let's talk this over at a better time.
a 23 year old man died there.
that's tragic of course but i don't know anything about it.
we suspect that you stole 25 kilos of explosives and caps from veigar and snorri inc., near fell cliff, explosives which were stolen from your shed last night.
as a suspect you have a right to be silent.
do you understand?
yes.
can you describe what happened that night?
this powerline and the electricity plant isn't just destroying the beautiful nature here.
we just want to know what happened that night.
i decided to take the explosives to delay the construction.
i bicycled up there and put the explosives in my bag.
then i went away.
did you see something or hear there?
no.
a witness driving up there that night said he saw someone on a bicycle on the road.
did you meet a car?
yes, i met eydís at bakki.
i'm sure she didn't recognize me.
we know when she was there.
she called the emergency number from snorri's phone soon after she met you.
yes.
then the excavator had just fallen off the cliff.
snorri's car was there with the lights and radio on.
are you saying that you saw nobody, didn't hear any noise from a car, didn't see any lights and saw no movements?
what is this?
i confessed that i stole the explosives.
what more do you want?
you realize that now you are the only one we know of who was there apart from snorri.
i didn't see anything.
i didn't hear anything.
lárus, you have to come with us to the station.
what?
we suspect you of having caused the accident which snorri died of.
this is nonsense.
if you don't want to come we have to take you.
are you arresting me?
you are a suspect.
it is my duty to tell you that as such you don't have to answer any questions about the crime and you have the right to have an attorney with you.
quite.
what's going on?
anna, you have to come with us well.
as a witness.
what nonsense is this?
do you have to do this here in front of the children?
you can go and talk with them or call someone who can keep them company.
freyr will wait for you.
ólafur
you can't tell us anything about the night of the accident other than that you slept in the car?
is that forbidden?
anna said that you told her that the car was out of gas.
that's why she got someone to drive her home from the dance.
how did you manage to drive home?
i had a can in the trunk.
which anna didn't know about.
no.
what happened to the can after that?
i threw it away.
why didn't you go all the way home?
you were only two kilometers away.
because i was tired.
do you know the phonenumber 929-2279?
yes, it's the number of a mobile phone i gave to lárus.
do you know where the phone is?
he lost it.
when?
i don't know.
if i knew then it wouldn't maybe be lost.
when did you find out the phone was lost?
last weekend, i think.
he told me then.
how long do i have to be here?
i've told you all this before.
why didn't you film that?
we know you took gas that morning at vellir.
you weren't up there.
do you recognize this?
it is marked jl.
probably jón's.
what has this got to do with it?
did you find any socks?
can you explain why it was in the gas tank of snorri's excavator?
this is ridiculous.
the unregistered number...
she gave him the phone.
but he said he lost it around the time of the accident.
he would hardly call himself.
no.
so snorri called.
it must be.
it's such a short time.
it must be.
i visited snorri twice at the hospital.
i cared a great deal about him.
that's understandable.
what do you mean?
you were once very much in love.
yes, we were.
then you found out he was your halfbrother.
yes.
do you know of anyone who would have wanted to stop snorri from waking up?
you have to tell us.
no.
no idea.
what?
aren't you going to turn it on?
i was just thinking what kind of person it is who can spin such a web of lies and how far he would be ready to go to uphold the lie.
i'm going to show you a picture of a footprint which we found, just newly made on snorri's car.
this is your footprint.
containing compressor-oil from the excavator.
they are the same.
we also have a lighter which was found where the excavator went off the cliff.
your fingerprints are on it.
when did you lose your mobile phone?
when?
you have the phonenumber 929-2279, right?
yes.
your mobile phone was called from snorri's car phone a few minutes before his mother found him and called for help.
do you know what i think?
i think you were going to get the excavator off the cliff while everybody was at the dance.
snorri saw your car up there, tried to call you and then he saw the excavator moving.
he came up there, you managed to jump out but he tried to stop the excavator.
you knew he would tell us when he woke up so you wanted to stop that from happening.
are you out of your mind?
i haven't talked to snorri for months.
i wasn't near the cliff.
the phone was on silent.
snorri was my friend.
why don't you just confess?
i was with dóra.
the phone was on silent.
i never did anything to snorri.
never.
that's the truth.
what happened to the phone?
i forgot it at dóra's.
when did you arrive at her place?
at midnight.
had this been going on for a long time?
no, we slept together once before.
it was a moment of madness.
not supposed to happen again.
but then... you know.
did you know she and snorri had been together?
yes.
and?
i heard him on the voice mail.
then he came and knocked.
she didn't open.
it was horrible.
it was obvious he was very much in love with her.
then he left.
drove away.
in a grey pickup?
yes.
when?
between one and two.
we will talk to dóra.
will she confirm this?
definitely.
i haven't talked to her after this.
inga, you've got a phonecall.
i knocked and knocked but she didn't answer.
i heard loud music.
she didn't answer so i decided to look in.
i didn't know what do to so i called you.
__file_terminal__
this is something more than an accident at work.
someone stole explosives and devices to use them.
we don't have detailed information but it was at least one box.
old lauga who lives at fell said she saw an ball of light.
what, are you conducting this investigation?
just so you know it, i'm in charge here.
yes, i know.
there is no explanation...
there is always an explanation.
no one was working.
everybody had the weekend off.
we don't know what snorri was doing there.
it was sabotage and nothing else.
you can pay off a lot of debts for...
are you accusing me of insurance fraud?
my son is injured.
i don't dislike snorri.
but his father is an idiot.
lalli...
he blames me for the accident.
why?
he wants to ruin me.
where the hell were you?
i called and called.
i lost the phone.
he had been drilling there.
he could have loosened it.
could be but it is still strange that it happened while no work was going on.
una, did you know snorri?
i told you about the explosives.
the information is on the internet.
mum wasn't sad because of the accident.
it was the picture.
what picture?
that's your mother, snorri.
who is this?
uncle oddur.
uncle oddur?
mum's brother.
he also had an accident líke this.
this must have created tension between the boys.
snorri and lárus.
she's veigar's daughter.
who?
anna.
she's snorri's halfsister.
what about this one?
have you seen her?
yes, she came here.
are you sure?
yes, i was going into the lift.
where are you two going?
us two?
i'm just going home.
i found out that anna bought the phonecard.
let's arrest lárus as soon as we get the warrant and let's talk to anna at the same time.
lárus, you have to come with us to the station.
what?
we suspect that you caused the accident.
this is nonsense.
isn't the boy with you?
who?
the one who came with you the other day.
the one in the arsenal-outfit.
so you are saying that the hidden people caused the accident and snorri's death.
not at all.
but the hidden people give us a warning.
the land is a living being and defends itself when we attack it as we always do.
the hidden people know it but can't stop it.
the cliff
the attacker hit her on the left side and she fell.
she hit her head on the edge of the chest of drawers.
she lost consciousness.
there are no signs of a fight.
it was one punch.
hello.
thank you.
dóra has regained consciousness.
then we can talk to her later today.
yes.
see this.
it's from the gynaecology-department.
the same date was circled on the calendar.
abortion.
i'm going to check it out.
helgi.
sorry, i...
inga, one moment.
there is an ongoing investigation.
i can't say anything.
do you look at it as a sign of no confidence in you that guõjón magnússon has been called home from holiday to take over the investigation?
is it true that the explosives were stored at holt?
when i came home veigar had trashed snorri's room.
he went out and he was absolutely furious.
i'll come as soon as i can.
wait.
he's not alone.
i need your interim report in the morning.
let's say eight o'clock.
then i'll take over.
my dear inga...
i'm not your inga.
have you really brought guõjón back from holiday to take over from me?
we don't have enough people...
wouldn't it have been more honest to fire me?
what is this?
it's unnecessary to overreact.
guõjón has years of experience...
you could have least told me in advance.
or just told me.
ajournalist told me.
stop it.
it's just a reaction to increased pressure.
guõjón is your boss.
this is ridiculous.
what about helgi?
i expect that he continues with you and guõjón.
what are you going to do about lárus?
we can't keep him forever.
i just need to get his alibi confirmed.
the sooner, the better.
this is orri.
leave a message.
it's ten o'clock.
where are you?
hello, darling.
hi, dad.
i just wanted to remind you of the horseshow tonight.
when is it?
eight o'clock.
it could be a bit difficult.
you always say that.
i know.
but i'm working.
is there a second show?
probably.
i'll try to come.
no, don't come then.
i'll come if i can.
all right.
all right, darling.
goodbye.
i'm not going to press charges.
who is it you are covering up for?
who attacked you?
dóra, you might have important information about what happened the night of the accident.
you must want us to find out what happened to snorri.
of course i want that.
lárus said he was with you.
can you confirm that?
yes.
nothing ever works out for me when it comes to men.
thankfully the baby is all right.
who is the dad?
lárus?
no.
then snorri is father, right?
yes.
did you meet him that night?
no, but he called a lot and left messages.
then he came and knocked but i didn't open up.
lárus was there and it was all a mess.
maybe this wouldn't have happened if i had talked to him.
do you think snorri knew that lárus was with you?
i don't know.
maybe.
he left a message.
i listened to a part of it.
but then i couldn't listen to more.
he probably wanted to talk about the baby.
we had talked about it over and over again.
he wanted to abort it.
it was terrible.
but the thing with lárus wasn't anything.
you visited snorri at the hospital.
yes.
he left something that night on my doorstep.
half a medallion in a chain.
he had always wanted to give it to me.
i had never wanted to accept it.
i wanted to give it back.
you put it around his neck.
yes.
the night he died.
yes.
why didn't you tell us?
i don't know.
why didn't you go through with the abortion?
i went to the hospital.
but then i couldn't go through with it.
how am i...
i don't know how i'm going to do this.
this is oddur who died in a tractor accident, right?
yes.
a lovely boy.
the kids loved him.
they visited him every week for months after the accident without knowing if he registered their presence.
can i take this picture?
sure.
i got this yesterday.
gunnar at holt demands the seizure of our assets.
he's taken over the loan you got when you bought the land.
so if we don't pay, which we can't as veigar doesn't get paid if he doesn't finish the job then gunnar can take the land.
yes.
and the cliff.
as the owner of the land he can put stop to the work.
after some time.
it is very understandable that veigar is upset.
he becomes another person when he drinks.
does he hit you?
he's a good man.
hello, this is freyr.
this is inga.
i've got halldóra's answering machine.
there is a message on it which has been erased.
i need to get it.
i thought that you could maybe help me.
call me.
goodbye.
halldóra?
sorry.
i thought i had killed you.
i wasn't going to...
i lost control.
i was dead drunk.
i wasn't going to hit you.
you will of course press charges and i will confirm everything you...
what's happening here?
what are you doing here?
where is halldóra?
this is a mess.
veigar bought the land off lauga by issuing a bond.
gunnar bought the bond off her.
now he is ruining veigar since he can't pay.
veigar attacked dóra.
really?
he was drunk and mad.
she's not going to charge him.
why?
i don't know.
how long have you known it?
about dóra?
i didn't know anything.
no.
i met guõjón at the sherrif's this morning.
he will take over tomorrow.
what?
he's taking over tomorrow and he will declare that this is just a row of accidents and everybody will be very happy and i'll look like a fool.
this is crazy.
ajournalist knew this before him and freyr did as well.
are you telling me that you didn't know anything?
i'm telling you.
i promise that i hadn't heard about this.
there is a man here in a grey coat.
he has a wound on his head.
but it didn't kill him.
anger.
he says those who live in the cliff are angry.
can't you tell us exactly then what they want?
he says that the destruction of the land has to stop.
the cliff must be left alone.
otherwise the consequences will be dire.
here is a boy as well.
he's worried about his dad.
he is surrounded by a bright light.
there is an "r" in the name.
reynir, rúnar...
he's has on a red football shirt which he likes a lot.
daddy is sad.
daddy doesn't have to be sad.
he says he is fine.
i've never seen people listen like this before.
maybe we should get him to work for us.
are you all right?
my son's name was rúnar már.
he was always wearing a red football shirt.
an arsenal-shirt.
he always had it on.
when he was seven...
i knew about the accident before...
i was there before the ambulance.
a few minutes.
he was lying on the street.
he didn't see anything.
he didn't see any cars.
he just saw his friend on the other side of the street.
he never saw the car.
i went to him and took him in my arms and i stroked his face and he looked in my eyes
and he said
and he said "i'm sorry", that was the only thing he said
like he had done something wrong, done something to me.
hello, helgi.
sheriff ragnar.
hello.
you were doing a great job.
thanks.
we have to have a meeting with inga.
i'll talk to you later.
inga, we were talking to guõjón...
what happened?
they went away without telling me anything.
are you going?
is no one going to tell me what he said?
no.
no?
what did he say to you?
none of your business.
what's going on?
am i supposed to come to the city?
shouldn't i finish this?
forget about it.
you're lucky that you just were there to assist the girl.
it's her mess.
what mess?
she's been going around with all kinds of nonsense.
i was told of some wild theory about potassium.
we have to finish this quickly.
i'll call you later.
how are you?
i was asked to take time off.
was that what happened in the meeting?
we have messed this up.
we don't have anything.
wait a minute.
look at this.
look.
anna, snorri and oddur.
anna's big brother.
have you heard about him?
no.
oddur died in an accident when he was a teenager.
but before he died he was in a coma for two years.
snorri and anna visited him a lot.
we can assume that anna would never let snorri suffer the same fate.
do you mean that it was euthanasia?
you said it.
the thing snorri got in his veins in the hospital...
what is it called?
potassium.
i'll bet that if we can sneak a peek in the drugreports at the clinic where anna works, just for the last week, we will see that some potassium is missing.
then we've got it.
we'll check it out.
we'll finish this.
we won't let guõjón get the credit.
no way.
he's not going to come here and finish this.
you're not quitting now.
i know a girl who works at the clinic.
can you call her?
yes.
i'm going to talk to anna.
but if she doesn't confess we don't have anything.
is bryndís there?
yes, potassium was taken out.
what are you thinking about?
go with him.
we know how snorri died at the hospital.
yes, i know.
his heart stopped.
we also know he died because of a potassium shock.
have you anything to say about that?
no.
it must have been incredibly difficult to see your older brother lying in hospital for months without being able to do anything for himself...
do you think it is fitting to talk about this?
no.
it is very understandable that someone would decide to stop this from happening again.
especially if you care about the person.
i don't have time to talk to you.
i have to do something.
there is potassium missing from the clinic where you work.
what?
aren't you happy to see me?
i'm not sure.
not a good day?
no, take a look at this.
hello.
can i help you?
no, i want to speak to helgi.
he's not in.
you can take this.
anna found this in my brother's room.
asked me to show it to you.
a half-finished letter and explosives instructions.
same kind of explosives as those which were stolen.
do you know where he is?
no.
he was very upset when snorri died.
he's been kind of strange since una left for the city.
he hasn't been seen for the last two days.
not since you arrested me.
if you had told the truth from the start
i wouldn't have had to arrest you.
don't worry about the boy.
i'll arrange a search.
thanks.
he's just a teenager but he might have explosives.
if you find him you'll call me right away.
stop calling me, úlfar i don't want to talk to you.
no, i don't want to hear about it.
two glasses of water and coffee?
yes.
just go in the car.
have you made contact with him?
no, there are about five or ten minutes since we came.
i'm going to talk to him.
aren't you going to use it?
no.
i'm just going up to talk to him.
he's not going to hurt anyone.
can you hear me?
yes.
stop.
i just want to talk to you.
don't come any nearer.
i just want to talk.
what are you doing?
don't touch it.
if you do i blow it up.
i'm coming a bit closer.
just to talk.
i blow it up if you come any closer.
we're going to talk together like men.
i'll just come a little bit closer.
this letter to una...
ask him about her.
how is una?
shut up.
when did you last see her?
i'll blow it up.
i have turned it on.
i'm not coming down if they don't stop this.
what are you doing?
don't think i don't know what you are doing.
delaying until a tactical squad comes.
there is no one coming.
there's just the two of us.
we are just talking.
i control this.
i don't care.
just go.
your message will be on the news tonight.
you probably called yourself so...
yes, what?
what was this?
why are you calling now?
what is this nonsense?
what are you doing?
i'm just doing what i have to.
i never told you to do this.
i care about you.
then why haven't you wanted to talk to me?
damn it.
i knew you were lying.
they're not going to do anything.
i control this.
we are just talking.
what are you doing here?
i didn't ask for assistance.
they are here on my authority.
your authority?
some idiot with weapons and explosives keeping a whole company hostage, that's what i call a mission for a tactical squad.
it's just a confused teenager.
you're just making it worse.
confused teenager.
we know he knows how to use dynamite.
30 meters.
if he points it at helgi you shoot him.
they have him in their sights.
just remember one thing.
don't point the gun at me.
all right.
they'll shoot if you do it.
ready, boys.
relax.
helgi knows him and he's talking to him.
just don't...
what the...
don't point it towards me.
i'll shoot me.
úlfur, look at me talk to me.
look in my eyes.
what are you going to do?
shoot your head off in front of everybody?
just go.
i can't be bothered with this anymore.
you're just hurting those who care about you.
don't to this.
don't do this.
just give me the gun.
then it will be all right.
just give it to me.
it will be all right.
he's coming with me.
aren't we agreed on that?
fine.
boys, it's over.
i saw on the internet how to blow it.
it's no problem.
una told me where the dynamite was.
i was just going to get it and go away.
then she came...
inga.
she ran after me and i had the dynamite in my backpack.
is she all right?
yes, she's all right.
good.
no one was supposed to get hurt.
what do you mean?
just...
i wasn't going to hurt anyone.
do you want to tell me anything else?
what?
snorri.
i turned the excavator on.
i was just going to burn it or something.
i saw the key was in it.
i put a stone on the accelerator, then he tried to save it and i couldn't do anything.
it just fell down.
then you called from his carphone to your brother.
some woman answered and you hung up?
yes.
then someone came.
i've never been as scared.
we'll just keep him in a cell.
helgi.
now.
all right.
i'll see you at the cliff.
good evening.
evening.
is everything all right?
maybe snorri isn't your only descendant.
is dóra...
it's difficult to get away from this place.
i have to tell you something.
it's not good news.
lauga died tonight.
i know she wouldn't have liked it if you heard it on the radio.
thank you.
i never stopped loving snorri.
i know that what i did wasn't right.
but it was easy.
i knew as soon as it happened that i would do it.
maybe i just became a nurse to be able to do it.
i changed the needle and added potassium.
enough potassium.
you were right.
snorri and i...
we promised each other that we wouldn't let the other one end up like my brother.
i know it's maybe terrible to say so but i don't regret it.
i read the chart and what the doctor said there confirmed what i suspected.
even if he had woken up he would never have lived the life he wanted to live.
you'll have to come with me.
i know.
that's why i came.
i'll just finish the report at home and send it to you.
it's at least in my name.
that which happened between us...
could you do it?
no.
of course i did.
great.
weren't you supposed to be playing somewhere?
yes, at a birthday party.
i heard guõjón talking about it on the radio that he had solved the case in those five minutes he was here.
you're not going to quit, are you?
someone was saying...
shall we listen to it?
dóra, this is snorri.
i'm at the dance.
i thought i would see you here.
i have to talk to you.
i'm outside your door and i have to talk to you.
answer.
i've been knocking at the door like crazy.
i know you are home.
why don't you let me in?
dóra, this is ridiculous.
i've got a gift for you.
the medallion you never wanted.
i want you to have it no matter what happens to us.
i'll leave it here outside.
dóra, i've been thinking a lot.
i think the baby is a gift.
i'm sorry that i asked you to abort it.
i've been thinking and even if you don't want to be with me
i would want to have the baby.
we don't have be together.
we'll find a solution.
wait, there are some lights up at the cliff.
what's going on?
they are not work lights.
maybe we'll meet some other time.
hello, darling.
who is it?
it's your father.
daddy.
i'm coming to the city.
i was thinking...
__file_terminal__
kids can get pretty much anything they want in the yard, as long as they can afford it.
'cause everything comes with a price.
hey, nick.
do you know anyone who's got any strawberry milk?
hey, do we know anyone who has strawberry milk?
yeah, i think donnie's got some.
donnie freckles?
no, donnie the mexican.
good, 'cause i'm really jonesing for some.
you think he'll trade for these?
what do they open?
beat me.
i found them in the garbage.
but look how many there are.
well, let me take a look at 'em.
if you're willing to pay the price...
well, i'll see what i can do.
you could get your hands on anything you want in the yard.
from strawberry milk to chocolate milk;
t-rexes to brontosauruses.
stuff like that is easy to get because the screws turn a blind eye to those kind of things.
other stuff is a little trickier.
the harder something is to get by the screws, the higher the price.
super soakers,
m-rated video games, puppy dogs...
that stuff is gonna cost you.
but the hardest thing to get past the screws is peanuts, or anything that contains peanuts, or anything that even
may contain peanuts.
peanuts are strictly forbidden in the yard.
the screws search our lockers, they go through our backpacks...
kids love peanut butter sandwiches.
always have, always will.
that's a historical fact.
and, oh, have you ever, like, held a girl's hand while eating a pbj?
that's the best.
and, like, you know, when you're sitting around with your friends playing video games and it's fun, but if you munch a nice, big pbj first, it's even awesomer.
it's like the colours seem brighter.
everything seems crisper.
like everything's right with the world.
mmm.
mmm!
so good!
yeah, man, you feel so much mellower.
yeah, everything's just so cool.
so, here's the thing that makes most kids happy, but the teachers act like the peanut is the devil's bean.
the thing is, they can never stop the peanut butter trade.
they can't!
there will always be the demand.
kids will always be able to get their hands on pbjs.
and they're willing to pay, so there's a tonne of money to be made smuggling pbjs into the yard.
here you go.
now get the fuck out of here, you junkie.
there's a demand, so i fill that demand.
i'm only giving the kids what they want.
the demand is so crazy, i can barely keep up.
every night after school, me, mickey, and pork chop are making sandwiches for, like, two solid hours, sometimes three.
then i package them and get them ready for distribution to all the hungry kids in the yard the next day.
i'm kind of like the santa claus of pbjs.
but santa claus doesn't charge for his presents.
yeah.
he gives his shit away for free.
well, maybe if i had a bunch of flying reindeer, then maybe it wouldn't be so hard for me to get the product into the yard.
i gotta get the stuff past the screws first.
what are screws?
teachers.
they're fucking crazy when it comes to peanuts.
we spend all of our time trying to keep one step ahead of all the teachers.
we tried tunnels, but that didn't work, so we tried unmanned drones.
but... that didn't work either.
oh, crap!
the easiest way is just to use a catcher.
what's a catcher?
a catcher's a kid who catches bags of pbjs that someone throws over the fence into the yard.
here you go.
we get someone on the outside, usually a junior high kid.
now, how did you get involved with the pbj trade?
well, i used to go to school here when i was a kid.
me and frankie have a little bit of a history, if you know what
i'm saying, and, uh, when he called me to ask for my help,
i just couldn't refuse.
now, every once in a while, a kid gets busted.
that's just part of the game.
freeze!
stop right there!
drop the bag!
the catchers know that going in.
it's a risky business, but they get paid a lot of money to take that risk.
keep moving, keep moving.
let's go.
one week of catching, a kid can make more than two years worth of allowance.
if you get caught with peanuts, you're screwed
suspended on the spot, get sent home, your parents freak out, and that's why i won't let anybody in my crew touch the stuff.
so a kid gets pinched.
it's a big fucking setback to lose a member of my crew, so i paid off patti to hook a patsy from nick's crew.
hi, johnny.
hey.
is it true that you have a magic ring that can make you invisible?
uh, yeah.
that is so cool!
hey, i just thought of something.
maybe you could help me solve a little problem i have.
sure.
see, the thing is, me and my friends, we really like pbjs.
i like those too.
oh, cool!
so, anyway, my cousin's best friend's older brother's girlfriend's sister is gonna be bringing some by this afternoon, and i know it sounds a little stupid, but i'm kind of nervous to pick them up myself.
you know, in case a teacher sees or something.
but you got this invisibility ring, right?
so they'd never see you.
no, no, they wouldn't see me at all.
great!
so you'll do it?
uh, well...
just give her the money and she'll give you the sandwiches.
that's a lot of money.
how many sandwiches can you and your friends eat?
we're pretty hungry.
can you do it?
i don't know, patti.
nick wouldn't like it very much.
but i'd love it.
i'd love it so much, i'd even let you kiss me on the cheek for seven seconds.
when she first asked me, i said no fudging' way.
nick's always told us none of us can get involved with the peanut racket, and there's no way i'm going to betray nick for a kiss on the cheek for a lousy seven seconds.
i'll do it if you let me put my hand in your back pocket for 15 seconds.
five seconds.
ten.
five!
deal.
i think she put a spell on me.
why do you say that?
because it was like i couldn't think straight.
all i could think about was putting my hand in her back pocket.
and then my body got all tingly, and my chest got numb.
she must have put a spell on me.
otherwise, i would have never done something so stupid.
psst!
hey, invisible kid, you there?
yeah, i'm here.
you got the money?
yeah, you got the stuff?
yeah.
looks like the money's floating.
it was nice doing business with you, wherever you are.
i did it!
johnny...
what the hell?
what the heck is this?
you don't know?
yes, i do.
i know it's some kind of napkin.
it says so right here, but i took some home and set the table with them, and my mom freaked out and sent me to my room, and her boyfriend even kept laughing!
i guess your cousin's best friend's older brother's girlfriend's sister ripped us off.
us?
she ripped you off.
what are you talking about?
you should have looked in the bag before you gave her the money.
it's just common sense.
oh.
okay, look, i'll get your money back.
it might take me a while, but i'll get it to you.
johnny, that wasn't my money;
it was frankie's, and he's going to want to talk to you.
i'm so frickin' screwed!
what makes you say that?
because i betrayed nick, and he's the only guy who can stand up to freakin' frankie.
and frankie is the last guy you want to owe money to.
so i heard you spent my 40 bucks in peanut money on a bag of tampons.
what, you got your period right now?
must have a pretty heavy period.
you got a heavy period?
no.
well, then, why would you do that to me?
i thought we were friends.
you did?
yeah, sure.
i always liked you.
that magic stuff you do really cracks me up.
uh, thanks.
but this tampon shit, it's not so fucking funny.
you lost my money.
but frankie, i didn't know it was your money, and i thought
i was getting pbjs.
i got ripped off.
no, you didn't get ripped off.
i got ripped off!
and all those kids who wanted those sandwiches
got ripped off!
and now you
i need to take a whiz.
fuck, mickey.
and now you gotta do something to make it right.
look, frankie, i'll get your money.
know what, pal d don't worry about paying me back.
really?
yeah, i told you we were friends, and friends help each other out.
i know you'd help me out if i needed it.
oh, you bet, frankie.
good.
so here's what i need you to do.
oops.
i need you to start catching for me.
what?
yeah, i need you to be my catcher, at least until
pork chop gets back.
i can't do this to nick.
what if he finds out?
how's he going to find out?
i ain't gonna tell him.
you gonna tell him, mickey?
fuck no!
i'll tell you one thing:
if you don't do this, he'll find o for sure.
besides, it's not a big deal.
you meet patti's cousin's best friend's older brother's girlfriend
patti's cousin's best friend's older brother's girlfriend's sister again.
you make a catch.
what if she rips me off again?
don't worry about it.
i had a little talk to her.
this time she'll have the real shit.
trust me.
i know what i'm doing.
when a kid owes me money, that makes me money.
now instead of paying a catcher 20 bucks, i got one for free.
it's all profit.
it's all gravy.
i love gravy.
as long as it's not too lumpy and shit.
our mom's gravy is too lumpy.
real lumpy.
the first time was the hardest, man.
i didn't think i could do it.
frankie set up a distraction so i could make the catch without
nick finding out.
hey, guys, frankie's crew's paying cory five bucks to eat some larva, and he's gonna do it.
where?
behind the portables.
come on!
i only eat bugs when i'm really hungry, like when my mom sleeps in and forgets to pack my lunch.
and i don't have much money, and frankie was offering five bucks, and all i had to do was eat the bugs at exactly 12:15.
what do you think
i was gonna say?
no?
i hated betraying nick, but it was like frankie had me by the nut sack.
i was so scared that nick was gonna catch me.
hey, man, aren't you coming?
nah, i gotta take a number two.
besides, i've seen it before.
suit yourself.
eww!
disgusting!
what is that?
oh, my goodness!
do it!
so disgusting!
eww!
hey, nick.
what?
i just saw patti eating a peanut butter sandwich.
are you sure?
yeah, i could smell it.
where's she get it?
yeah.
that's weird.
i'd better go talk to mary on this one.
frankie was up to something
i could feel it
and i needed to find out what.
that looks so good.
hey, mary, can i talk to you?
mm-hmm.
what
well, i was just trying to figure out how your brother's still getting pbjs into the yard even after pork chop got busted.
beats me.
what... what are you eating?
i hate lying to nick.
the thing is, usually i'm good at keeping secrets, but it feels weird keeping things from nick.
lying to nick sucks.
just gonna go take a little dump.
i gotta go to the bathroom and go catch up on some reading.
i gotta take the browns to the superbowl.
frankie keeps making me do it, and every time i do it, it feels worse, and plus, i'm not a very good liar.
the guilt's driving me crazy.
i keep thinking, "what if nick finds out"?
i can't eat; can't sleep.
lying to nick is making me, like, physically sick.
hey, invisible kid.
you don't look so good.
i don't feel so good.
you should think about getting out of the game for a while.
so how do you like working with johnny?
he's cool.
i mean, whatever floats your boat, but he's gotta get rid of that frickin' magic shit, because, bitch, he'll get caught before he gets into junior high, 'cause this shit's
the real world.
psst!
mickey, tell frankie i can't do this anymore.
hey, frankie, johnny says he can't fucking do this anymore.
tell him he's my best worker, and ask him what the fucking problem is.
yo, johnny, frankie says you're one of his best workers, and what's the problem?
tell him it's driving me crazy.
i don't care if you guys tell nick.
i don't care anymore.
hey, frankie, he says he doesn't fucking care y you tell
nick.
he doesn't fucking care about this anymore.
ask him if i told him we were friends.
did he tell you, by any chance, that you guys were friends?
yeah.
he says yeah.
tell him i don't like to see a friend of mine so unhappy, so one more catch, i'll cut him loose.
he says one more fucking catch and you're fucking loose.
tell him thanks.
he says thanks.
no problem, friend-o.
no problem, fuck face.
thank y...
great.
oh, wait!
tell him mickey's a fucking idiot.
mickey's a fucking...
wait!
oh, yeah, for sure.
we'll cut him loose.
we'll cut him loose like a fart...
hold on...
wait a second...
damn!
you wanna know who my brother's using to get sandwiches into the yard?
yeah, i do.
you're not gonna like it.
he's using a catcher, a member of your crew.
johnny.
i don't believe you.
the only reason i told nick about johnny...
you know what?
i don't even know why i told him.
i guess i felt bad that his supposed friend was betraying him and what my brother was doing to him, but i was just trying to do him a favour.
i took a big risk coming to talk to him.
if my brother found out, he'd freak.
and repays me by calling me a liar.
you are such a jackass.
i didn't want to believe her, but deep down i knew she was telling the truth.
i should have seen it all along.
i just gotta take a boo.
due number two.
i gotta take a crap.
but i guess it never occurred to me that my best friend would betray me.
look, nick, what johnny's doing is wrong, but the way the whole peanut trade works is even wronger.
what are you talking about?
i'm talking about, it's easy for kids to get sucked in 'because it seems like easy money.
this time it was johnny, the next time it'll be some other kid.
the only way to end the cycle is to change the way the whole system works.
what are you saying?
i'm saying you should take it over and do it right.
oh, come on, j.j. , you know i wouldn't touch this shit.
i mean, it's too risky, too dangerous.
yeah, but we're smarter than those guys.
if we took it over, we could do it right
fresh bread, fair prices.
we could buy
epipens so the kids who are allergic could be safe.
i don't know.
nick, this whole thing, it's torn our crew apart.
at least think about it.
when i found out about johnny, my first plan was to walk up to him and punch him in the nose.
but then the more
i thought about it, i realized that wouldn't really change things.
let's hook back outside.
hey, johnny, we should go shoot hoops after this.
you wanna go shoot hoops?
um...
that would be great, nick.
i'd like to shoot hoops more than you can imagine.
but i... gotta do number two.
i'll meet you outside.
you know what?
i'm begin to suspect you have...
irritating bowel syndrome.
no, i'm good.
what do we got here?
hey, invisible guy.
hey.
listen, this is my last time.
well, it's been nice working with you.
here.
catch.
you with the bag, stop!
stop right there!
get your freaking hands in the air!
keep 'em up!
what is that?
something's going on.
screws are busting someone!
who?
who is that?
oh, my god!
hey, guys, johnny got busted!
what the hell would he get busted for?
oh, he's in so much trouble, man.
i'm so sorry, nick.
i'm so sorry.
i can't believe johnny would do that to nick.
that's, like, the one thing he told us not to do.
it was a stupid thing to do.
but four days suspension for getting kids peanut butter sandwiches?
it seems harsh!
and the thing is, it doesn't matter how many times kids get suspended.
it's not gonna stop kids from smuggling pbjs into the yard.
and all that's going to happen to johnny is he's going to miss a math quiz.
how's that going to make him a better kid?
it's going to make him dumber!
pff!
and he was already pretty fucking dumb as it was.
thanks for meeting me, nick.
listen, man.
we're all really busted up about how things went down with johnny.
i know he's a friend of yours, but he's a friend of ours too.
look, he's not my friend anymore.
what do you mean?
you guys have been tight since kindergarten.
now in his time of need you're just going to drop him like that?
guess so.
that's cold, man.
i like it.
see how that worked?
having johnny owe me 40 bucks was the best money i ever spent.
look, i got a free catcher, i got one of nick's crew suspended, and i got nick to turn his back on one of his best friends.
which he never fucking does.
it must be killing him.
now his whole crew is like a chicken with one of its wings cut off.
yeah, fucking flapping around in circles and shit.
i think i got pretty good value for my money.
don't you?
four days later, johnny came back from his suspension.
while he was gone, i kept hoping nick would forgive him and think about what i'd said, but... it seemed like his mind was made up.
nick, i'm back.
i came back.
shouldn't you be over there with your new friends?
nick, come on!
the only reason i did it is 'cause i was set up.
it doesn't matter why you did it.
you did it.
that's why
i have to turn my back on you.
nick!
look, you and i are finished!
got it?
from now on, you're invisible to me.
now get the fuck off my slide!
sorry, johnny.
it's okay, suzi.
i understand.
i'm sorry you're such a retarded nut gargler, that is!
he's all yours, frankie.
nick doesn't want him anymore.
what makes you think i want him?
why would we hire a loser like you?
'cause i already got a delivery set up for this afternoon, and this one's for free.
why the fuck would you do that?
'cause i got nothing left to lose.
why should we trust you?
you fucking screwed over your best friend.
he's not my friend anymore.
all right, johnny.
let's see what you got.
uh, frankie, i'm not sure this is a great idea.
shut up.
let me do the thinking.
this is what i live for.
the kid's spirit was crushed.
he's mine.
psst!
frankie.
nice work, kid.
no problem.
bon appétit.
the fuck you call me?
yeah, you calling him fag?
ferme la douche, pork chop.
it's french.
keep up the good work, kid.
hey, man, yo, uh, right here.
show me the money, bitch.
now, get lost.
yeah, okay.
you have fresh stuff?
show me the laurier.
one.
that's what i'm talking about.
here you go.
get out of here.
once i knew johnny was lying to me, i had to come up with a plan.
you knew johnny was lying to you?
yeah, i knew it the whole time.
mary told me.
but why didn't you do anything?
i did.
i sat back and waited for him to get busted, as i knew he would.
then, when he did, i made this huge deal about turning my back on him.
from now on, you're invisible to me...
but that was only to get frankie's trust when he came back.
why the fuck would you do that?
'cause i got nothing left to lose.
so we could plant the tainted sandwiches in the bag.
then the kids would turn against frankie, and i could take over the peanut racket.
ahh!
what is it?
what's wrong?
this is shit!
this isn't pbj!
this is a shit sandwich!
aww!
nobody eat these sandwiches!
they're contaminated!
they're tainted with feces!
what's feces?
the peanut butter's shit!
how much did you eat?
what the fuck, frankie!
hey, johnny caught the bag!
it's all johnny's fault.
don't blame johnny, frankie.
you saying you don't control what you sell?
you don't stand behind it?
what?
we can't be held responsible for every sandwich that we sell!
you hear that everyone?
he's not responsible!
you sell peanut butter sandwiches because i let you.
it's a privilege, and with great privilege comes great responsibility.
and since you won't take responsibility, as of today, i'm taking over the peanut racket, and i guarantee every sandwich i sell.
you can't do that.
i think i just did.
so, nick, why did you decide to take over the pbj racket?
well, i saw what was happening when the wrong people ran it.
yeah, but now that we're running it, we can do it right, with epi-injector sites and fair prices, because the way frankie and mickey were doing it, someone was bound to get hurt, and not just the allergic kids.
friendships were being torn apart, and everything was getting messed up.
yeah.
the game, the life, it makes people do things that they wouldn't normally do.
my friend was lying to my face and going behind my back.
yeah.
the whole thing was an act.
nick was never really mad at me.
well... he was a little.
but he forgave me.
oh, i wouldn't go that far.
but... you forgive me now?
of course i forgive you, johnny.
now, i need you to get to work.
what are you talking about?
i got a bag for you to catch.
__file_terminal__
maybe to adults it looks like we're just running around, playing whatever we want to, wherever we want to, running all around the yard, willy-nilly without barriers or boundaries.
but it's not that simple.
kids can't just play anywhere they want, because the yard is carved up into a whole bunch of, like, territories.
the territories are all controlled by different groups who all have their own rules for who gets to play where.
so, like, there's the rope-skipping area, which belongs to the grade five girls.
they decide who can play there.
they let other girls play there, but only if they like them.
they won't let boys play there, 'cause they think boys are smelly.
except, they let danny steele play there, but that's only because he smells like one of those scented candles.
the tables where kids play ju-ji-mon, that's the realm of the nerds.
anyone can play there if they want
the nerds can't stop them.
but nerds tend to be really good ju-ji-mon players, so the other kids are, like, scared to play there.
it's sorta like a safety zone for nerds.
there's the sandbox.
that's where the little kids play, because little kids like to dig
who knows why?
maybe they're hoping to find buried treasure someday or something.
there's the oasis, where mary maladich and the other girls are
not that i care where mary is or anything...
me and my crew hang out at the top of the slide so i can see what's going on in the whole yard, most of which i control.
but not the stairs.
that's where frankie and his jerk-ass crew hang out.
they also control the soccer pitch, which means if you want to play there, you have to ask permission from frankie and his crew.
and they hardly give permission to anyone.
and that's what started this whole what started this whole problem.
can i help you?
we want to play the winners.
well, you can't.
the losers of this game are playing the winners.
but that is not fair.
we don't make the rules.
we just enforce 'em.
you want us to enforce them?
enforce?
i will enforce your face into my ass!
fuck is this kid?
take it easy.
he just arrived from our homeland.
well, maybe he should get back on his banana boat, and get back to his
youssef, stop!
not now.
youssef, that's not how it works in here.
before we act, we must first talk to nick.
he is a good man.
come on.
nick, they haven't allowed us to play on the soccer pitch all year.
it's totally bull crap!
yeah, i've noticed that.
i was hoping they'd do the right thing, but i'm not surprised they're being total jerks.
i knew you would understand.
so that means that you will make them share the soccer pitch with us?
yeah, just give me a couple of days to set it up.
no!
it must be afternoon recess-- excuse me.
it must be afternoon recess today!
it won't be today, but i promise i'll get you in there.
you just gotta be patient!
nick, my people have been patient long enough.
you are the big boss man of the whole yard.
this should be a simple matter for you.
being the so-called "big boss man" isn't as easy as everyone thinks.
it's fucking hard!
all the kids expect me to solve their problems like that, but all of these things take time.
they're difficult, they're complicated.
nobody seems to understand that.
bud, i want to get you in there.
i do.
but these things take time.
stop it with this time!
we are out of time!
it is time.
nick, what i'm about to do, i ask for your forgiveness.
wedgie
huh?
oh, shit!
oh, crap!
oh, bud... what have you done?
oh, sh... ahhh!
desperate times call for desperate measures, nick.
why won't you let bud and his friends use the soccer field?
because they're a security risk.
what do you mean by that?
why do you mean, what do i mean?
it's obvious that they're the ones who attacked us.
yeah, they didn't even attack us face-to-face.
they hid like little scaredy-cats.
they hid like little scaredy- fucking-mice running into a fucking hole the fucking wall.
we did what we did because they took away all the other option.
how does that make you feel?
this game is like a religion to us, and they are denying our rights to practice our religion.
it's like they think they own the soccer pitch, but only god owns the soccer pitch.
the soccer field belongs to us.
yeah, it's our god-given right.
the sad part is, they're only hurting themselves.
because now in order to restore the peace, we have to hurt them.
yeah, it's called a primitive strike.
i saw it on the history channel.
it's when one country hits another one first, and hits them so hard, they can't hit you back.
don't you mean a preemptive strike?
no, primitive.
you hit 'em hard like a caveman.
or a t-rex.
what's up?
just thought you might want to know, frankie and his crew are going to hit back.
know what they're gonna do?
i don't know, but from the sounds of it, they're gonna go after bud and youssef.
what can i do for you, nick?
i heard you're planning to attack bud and youssef.
so what if we are?
look at what they did to us?
they water balloon bombed us on our own turf, just because we won't let them on our soccer field.
who says it's your soccer field?
what do you mean?
this field has always belonged to my family.
before me, it belonged to my older brother, drago.
before him, it belonged to my cousin, vlad, and he even donated the bench, so, yeah, damn fucking right it belongs to me.
this ball?
this ball is my family's blood.
you see these brown marks?
this is my father's and uncle's blood.
they were
assassined" during little league finals last year in my homeland.
and because of the massacre, the game wasn't even finished.
we had to flee the country the next day, and when we did, all i brought with me was this ball.
and now, because of frankie and his crew, i can't even play on the soccer pitch.
how is that fair?
tough shit!
that's just the way it works.
and if bud and his gang think they can change that by bombing us, they're going to be sorely mistaken.
yeah.
real sorely.
totally sorely.
how do you even know it was them?
i was with bud when it happened.
all right, nick.
as usual, i guess you're right.
so, if something were to happen to them now, it couldn't have anything to do with me.
i was here with you.
how could you do this to me?
you bastard!
how could you do this to me?
okay, easy, easy.
do what?
i'm just talking to my friend, nick.
frankie, on my father's life, until you realize our right to share the soccer pitch, we will continue to sting you, and sting you like a swarm of killer bees.
okay, okay, come on, come on.
what are you gonna do about it, bud?
bud, you can't win like this.
they'll just make your lives miserable.
my friend, they already make our lives miserable.
besides, we have a secret weapon.
hey, bud.
bud!
what's your secret weapon?
i can show you, but you must wear this.
this is our secret weapon.
we call him "the bladder", because his bladder is the size of a camel's hump, and he has been eating nothing but asparagus for the past four days and drinking gallons w water.
he is ready.
today, a very stinky rain will come down on the heads of frankie and his crew.
and now you must leave.
i cannot do this part with people watching.
he is very modest.
it reeks!
we found out that they got this kid.
he's got a huge bladder.
they kept him in a hideout, and brought him bottles of water, and all he did was drink and eat asparagus.
he could fill like 50 balloons a day.
so then we had to ask ourselves, where was the fucking hideout, and where were they launching the balloons from?
aw, my mom's gonna kill me!
he kept changing it up, moving it around.
they like to stay mobile, launching from different spots, using different methods.
since we couldn't stop them from launching their balloons, we had to stop them from getting the materials they needed to make the balloons.
so we cut their water supply down to a trickle.
where do you think you're going?
to the water fountain.
you got a permit?
you don't need a permit to get water.
you do now.
says who?
it's the new rule.
so how do you get this permit?
beats me.
not my department.
next.
youssef, no.
hey, you're cool.
enjoy your drink.
this is an outrage!
let's go.
they think they can bring us to our knees by cutting off a basic human need
water?
taking off our water supply just makes us thirstier for justice!
do you think they'll try another attack?
shit, yeah.
the only question is when.
it's like they're holding us hostage.
none of us even want to play soccer anymore, 'cause we're all too nervous and shit.
yeah, which isn't fair.
there's only a few of them.
we got the numbers, we got the strength
i mean, they should be nervous, not us.
yeah, but you are nervous.
i mean, your whole crew's scared.
i ain't scared of those skinny fucking foreigners.
me neither.
i ain't scared of nothing.
velociraptors.
just a little.
ghosts.
okay, i'm kind of scared of ghosts.
and bigfoot.
oh, yeah.
bigfoot.
well, you're scared of the ogopogo.
well, the ogopogo's a 100- foot-long sea monster, you idiot!
we are used to living under the boot of bullies.
that just means we have to use our imagination.
and i have a very active imagination.
i, too, enjoy imagining things.
yes, youssef imagines many very weird things.
yes, watch.
i'll imagine something right now.
ready?
the whole situation is out of control.
the north africans are as pissed off as ever, and so is frankie's crew.
plus, they're scared about another attack.
the whole yard's on edge!
hey, nick, why is youssef wearing a raincoat on a sunny day?
oh, shit.
what's going on, man?
stay back.
why?
because you are innocent.
whoa, whoa.
hold on, man.
what's going on?
whatever it is, it's, it's not worth it.
please, just think this over.
nice raincoat, dink.
i respectfully ask you one let us share the soccer pitch.
you're never gonna play on our soccer field.
it is not yours.
is too.
is not is too.
what?
it is god's gift to everyone.
what the fuck are you talking about?
you guys don't even believe in god.
do too.
yeah, but not the right one.
yeah, your god is gay.
totally gay.
is not!
yes!
one side hits, the other hits back worse, and then those guys want revenge for that, so they hit back even harder.
and then those guys want revenge for that, so they hit back even harder.
and it never stops.
it just gets worse.
youssef got suspended.
frankie and his grew broke youssef's arm and what did they get?
they got one day of detention because they said it was self-defense.
how do you break a kid's arm in self-defense?
that's all you got?
and the more they want to fight, the harder it is for me to make them stop fighting.
i needed to talk to mary.
go, go, go!
nick has been ignoring me ever since we, um, you know.
so i was starting to think he was kind of a jerk.
but then he sent me this note asking me to meet him, so i started to think maybe he wasn't a jerk.
hey.
hi.
so, i wanted to talk to you.
i wanted to talk to you too.
oh, really?
yeah, but you go first.
okay, well, i wanted to talk to you about soccer.
what?
but then when we met, i started to think, maybe he was a jerk.
again.
what about soccer?
you know all the stuff that's going on between your brother and the north africans?
i'm trying to get those guys to fight it out on the soccer field.
nick, i don't care about soccer!
yeah, but couldn't you pretend to care as a favour to me?
you're asking me to go against my family?
after the way you've treated me?
what?
so, how'd it go?
i don't know.
it was like she was, like, mad at me for something.
women!
why?
i don't know.
maybe because she's a friggin' nut muncher!
hey, language!
yeah, she's not a nut muncher.
oooh, sorry.
so... so did she agree or not?
is she gonna help us?
i don't know, j.j.
there!
all grade two boys are in, nick.
grade four boys are in too.
the grade five boys are in.
right, but what about the girls?
still no word, and we need the girls.
frankie and mickey won't just do it because they think the boys are into it.
they'll only do it if they think it'll impress the girls.
bud, how's youssef?
his body's broken, but his spirit is strong.
how are you?
bud, i'm trying to make it so you guys can fight it out on the soccer field in a game against frankie's crew.
that's all we ever asked for.
thank you, nick.
well, it's not exactly a done deal yet.
some things have to fall into place first.
what's all this fucking bullshit about a soccer game?
why?
you scared?
frankie, i just heard you challenged bud's team to a soccer game.
that is so awesome.
wow.
whoever wins this is gonna be, like, the coolest kid in school.
i will never...
understand... girls.
i never understood why those guys got to call the shots and hog the soccer fields anyway.
it's not fair.
that's stupid!
nick's plan sounds fair.
yeah, i'd totally watch that game, and i don't even give a crap about soccer.
it's boring, and no one ever scores.
but i would love to watch frankie get served.
it would be like, unh!
suck it, frankie!
the reason i want to be a doctor is because i don't believe people should suffer, but i'd love to see frankie get his ass kicked.
so it was all set up.
all bud's team had to do was win.
come on, ref!
what the fuck?
come on!
they were out-geared, out-muscled, out-weighed, but bud's team played with heart.
frankie's team just played dirty.
both sides fought hard, but when the recess bell rang, the game was still scoreless.
oh, come on!
come on!
this is bullshit.
come on!
so the game was continued at morning recess the next day.
run!
come on, guys!
but nobody scored then either, so it was continued at lunch.
and no one scored then either, so it was continued next recess.
the match went on for three whole days.
it was as hot as a hot dog, and frankie's team looked like they were running out of steam.
but just when it looked like bud's team had the game in the bag, frankie found a way to change the rules of the to change the rules of the game.
what the fuck?
that's it.
game over.
you lose.
what?
what do you mean?
we can't play, which means you lose, unless you've got another ball.
bullies don't play by the rules.
they play dirty, which is why sometimes it seems like it's damned near impossible for rule-abiding kids to win.
but every once in a while, things do go the right way.
i've got a ball.
game on, my main man!
you know, most kids didn't think bud's team was gonna win, but i did.
well, what made you think they'd win?
frankie's team was playing for greed;
bud's team was playing for justice, so it meant more to them.
most kids didn't think about that, which is why i got most kids to bet against them.
you get money on the game?
aw, hell yeah.
lots of money, like, half my paper route money.
hey, a man's gotta feed his family, and i got a big family.
thanks for meeting me again.
whatever.
i got something for you.
um...
it's a pizza.
thanks... what's it for?
well, you helped me out.
i wanted to say thank you.
yeah, well, i almost didn't do it.
why not?
'cause you were such a jerk to me.
what are you talking about?
i didn't do anything.
i didn't even talk to you.
exactly.
do you understand girls?
um... uh... no.
it just goes to show you, even when you're dealing with violent people, you can have a peaceful solution.
kids are always gonna get into fights, right?
there's no stopping that, but all we can do is try to make the fight fair.
and that's what we did, and it worked.
problem solved.
hold up there, mohammed.
not so fast, "playa".
what is the problem here?
the thing is, there's a bit of a new rule.
you see, we were concerned, because a few of your guys got roughed up in that last game, and so, for your own protection, we talked to the teachers, and they said that from now on, in order to avoid
any more injuries, everyone has to wear protective equipment.
you got protective equipment?
no...
can you get your dad to buy you some?
oh wait, i forgot
your dad's dead.
wow.
♪ a soldier fought until he fell ♪
♪ out on some foreign battlefield ♪
♪ and now he's standing 'round the throne ♪
♪ lord another soldier gone ♪
♪ i said another soldier gone ♪
♪ gone ♪
♪ gone away ♪
♪ gone on home ♪
♪ another soldier gone ♪
♪ di a and left us ♪
__file_terminal__
pyke to plumber command.
current location, sector zed niner.
approaching location of unidentified spacecraft.
copy that, pyke.
do you have visual?
affirmative, but it's not a ship.
yeah, we were pretty sure it wasn't.
mind telling me what it is?
sorry.
that's classified.
typical plumber bureaucracy.
you are, however, advised to proceed with extreme caution.
helpful.
wait.
is that an animal?
this is magister pyke of the plumbers.
i'm under orders to take you into custody.
your cooperation will help ensure your own safety.
no.
guys, i need backup... stat!
help me!
i'm surrounded!
i'm serious!
they're everywhere!
hey, not the 10!
not the 10!
time to go with the flow.
there he is!
wait!
i need... a little respect, please?
that's just embarrassing.
you got a mop or something?
or something.
heads up, kevin.
goop can't move without his artificial gravity disk.
say "thank you.
fans still coming!
not...
one...
word.
it's okay.
i took pictures.
ben tennyson, this is magister pyke, calling from planet pisccis.
apparently, i'm supposed to report any sightings of this being to you.
you've seen aggregor?
briefly, but he got away from me.
everything okay there?
nothing to worry about.
they happen all the time.
exactly who is this aggregor?
and why was it so urgent that i contact you about him?
nosy little fish, isn't he?
sorry to keep you in the dark on this, pyke.
we just don't want to cause any unnecessary panic.
yeah,well,idon 'twanta bunch of hotshot tadpoles swimming all over my planet, telling me how to run my precinct.
that's okay.
we weren't planning on swimming.
this is rust bucket iii on approach, requesting permission to land.
over.
they're not responding.
maybe because "land
doesn't really apply here.
pisccis is almost completely made up of water.
the small solid core at the center is less than 2% of the planet's total mass.
you actually think that's interesting, don't you?
this is rust bucket iii, requesting permission to land... d-dive?
over?
maybe their communications are out again.
it could be aggregor.
i'm definitely sensing him on this planet...
somewhere.
no point waiting around for an invitation.
take us down.
keep going.
he's down deep.
you sure this is safe?
trust me... this baby can handle anything.
don't panic.
it's just a sea tremor.
pyke said they're normal on this planet, remember?
this baby can handle anything.
including that?
i said, "don't panic.
we're safe as long as we stay inside the ship.
yeah, now's a good time to panic.
helmets on!
head for the cargo bay and seal the cockpit!
now what?
i'm sending out a distress signal.
hopefully someone on this planet will pick it up before...
get off me!
gwen!
what are you waiting for?
if i transform, when i change back, i won't be wearing my plumber suit, and we're running out of oxygen fast.
it always puts me back into whatever i was wearing the first time i changed after the reboot.
there's got to be a button for that.
you want me to look for it now?
we have to help gwen!
we still can.
follow my lead.
i made some alterations.
i installed propulsion units and neuroshock pulsers.
have you tested them?
i have!
nice going, but we're gonna need a lot more juice to take this thing down.
or we just go for his weak spot.
you all right?
yeah.
go!
all at once, on my mark.
1, 2...10!
yes!
guys?
kevin!
nice going, gwen.
another second, and he would have been crushed by the pressure down here.
but he still can't breathe!
no!
wait!
[ breathes deeply,
that thing just saved his life.
yeah.
but i look like a dork.
what's it like?
the air's cold but okay.
and it smells a little...
fishy?
how'd you guess?
next time you decide to crash my planet, give me some warning.
or would that cause "unnecessary panic"?
pyke?
got your distress call.
just the person i wanted to see.
i can scan you to find aggregor.
be my guest, but you're wasting your time.
our scanners aren't picking him up anywhere in the entire planetary ocean.
that's because he's not in the water.
he's inside the planet's solid core.
the core is the most inaccessible place in the world.
there's only one way in, and it's under constant guard.
trust me, fish lips... she's never wrong.
nice hat.
those are normal, right?
they're more frequent than usual, but yes.
nothing to worry about.
they do tend to spook the natives.
aren't you guys the natives?
not down here.
they are.
hey!
what'd you do that for?
thought i'd let the local authority handle things.
how come i was never that cool as ripjaws?
you were never that cool, period.
there's too many!
how are we supposed to beat them?
if you can't beat 'em, join 'em!
no way i'm letting you have all the fun.
nice shootin'.
almost makes up for the headgear.
ben, your faceplate's about to go!
i know.
hope i got someone good dialed in.
humongous...
they've never seen anything like you.
ben!
stop panicking!
transform again!
ampfibian!
who can breathe down here.
we're on the clock now,
ben.
yeah.
i could change back to human any moment.
we'd better hurry!
halt!
this is a restricted area!
can't stop.
official plumber business.
listen to me!
there's a dangerous intergalactic criminal in there!
i'll explain later, okay?
allright,easeup, tadpole!
i was gonna vouch for you, but now i'm not so sure.
pyke,whatis themeaningof this?
theseplumbersneedtoaccess the planetary core.
outsidersareforbiddenfrom entering the core.
yeah?
maybe you should talk to whoever's already in there.
we need to move... now!
i'llkeepan eyeonthem .
we can breathe in here.
you hurt his feelings.
he's a fish.
go on.
shoo.
what's in there?
thepisccisgravitational multiplier.
it generates the centripetal force that holds our planet's liquid atmosphere together.
i mean it!
go away!
wekeepit in themost inhospitable environment imaginable to prevent it from being tampered with.
doesn't seem so inhospitable.
to you, air breather.
not to the likes of me.
i didn't see you!
i-i...
in there!
the tremors are coming from that machine.
i'm sure of it.
you're right, tennyson.
without this, the whole planet's pulling itself apart.
aggregor!
clever of paradox to disguise this piece of the map of infinity as the single most important item on this planet.
don't even think about it.
if you move, i'll destroy it, and planet pisccis...
comes apart at the seams.
the tremors before... that was you trying to get it loose.
you're smarter than you look, boy.
admittedly, not a great achievement.
i'm not letting you leave with that!
ben!
next time, try absorbing something that doesn't conduct electricity.
you're not getting away that... aggregor!
you completely forgot about me, didn't you?
ben!
big chill!
he went that way.
really?
the centripetal accelerator!
what have you done to it?
you've doomed us all!
i didn't do anything.
it was aggregor.
he took the doohickey and escaped through that hole...
that...
lsn't there anymore.
wait!
pyke!
this is all a mistake!
the only mistake here was me trusting your shapeshifting friend.
leave him alone!
we've got to get him to the water.
back away from that plumber!
this isn't what it looks like.
halt!
return the stolen item now!
i will, as soon as
i catch the guy who's getting away with it!
explain yourself!
could do that.
or i could just go...
ultimate big chill!
stop, or we'll...
gone.
ben!
the whole planet's breaking apart!
we've only got a few minutes!
on my way.
anything i can do?
not unless you have a spare centripetal accelerator on you.
explain what that means.
no big words.
it's like an antigravity multiplier.
i was hoping you were going to say something like that.
goop!
if it can pull me together, maybe it can do the same for the planet.
ben, no!
get him out!
he's...
he's been atomized... spread throughout the entire ocean.
i'm sorry, gwen.
it's working!
the planet's atmosphere is stabilizing!
least he went down saving the world.
onlysomeof theworld,i'm afraid.
most of it is floating off into space.
this doesn't make sense.
planetary atmosphere is now reading 60%.
no... 65%.
ben?
75%!
80%!
all right, all right.
i get it... you're happy.
planetary liquid atmosphere at 96%.
i see him!
hang on, ben!
we're coming!
thanks for the repair job, pyke.
it was the least we could do to thank the one who saved our planet.
wish we could have stopped aggregor while we were at it.
if there's anything we can do to help...
you can start by getting this slime sack off my windshield.
go on!
scat!
we don't want you!
come on.
don't be that way.
this is your home.
you belong here... with your own kind.
you aren't fooling me.
that was noble.
it was nothing.
you should have seen the one who got away.
__file_terminal__
previously on ben 10 ultimate alien...
*******
******
***** those aliens.
i'll be unstoppable.
the aliens are gone.
the aliens are all in me! you killed them!
i absorbed them.
all their power is mine.
you want some more?
let go of me!
sorry.
it's just...
what he did...
i lost my...
is that the best you can do?
because i didn't feel a thing.
i'm as invulnerable as
bivalvan's armor.
tennyson can't hurt me.
nothing can!
eradico!
did you know
galagpagus' people can't be harmed by manna?
gwen!
she's okay.
which is more than i can say for aggregor!
aggregor!
wake up, ben tennyson.
azmuth?
where's... aggregor is long gone.
his eventual goal is why i am he...
let me see that.
pathetic workmanship!
and an evolutionary function?
begging for trouble.
you never show up unless something important is happening.
yes.
we find ourselves in a situation so dire, that perhaps i should risk giving ben my new omnitrix.
new omnitrix?
gimme!
i'll kick aggregor's butt!
no, it's not completely ready, and clearly, neither are you.
not yet?
at the rate you're regressing, likely not ever.
burn.
not now, kevin.
come on, that was classic.
likely not ever.
i've wanted a chance to apologize to you for months, but right now, i've got to stop aggregor.
if you're not here to help, we'll catch up later.
wait, ben.
hear him out.
your lack of patience is foremost among your many weaknesses.
i have crucial information for you.
aggregor's got to be looking for a ship to replace his busted one.
best way to get one is to hit some forever knights' bases.
what about old plumber headquarters?
some of them have mothballed starships.
listen to me!
aggregor won't be looking for a ship!
with his new powers, he doesn't need one!
then we'll never find him.
if you listen, you will.
i know where he's going.
and if we don't stop him, the entire universe will tremble at his might.
welcome to galvan mark ii.
you rebuilt your entire planet?
of course we did.
it was damaged from the war.
stop wasting time with trivialities.
cool screen saver.
it is not a screen saver.
it is the single most important item in the universe.
what's it do?
it is the map of infinity.
come on, that's just a legend.
no, it is as real as you and
i.
a complete map of space-time?
extending through 17 dimensions.
with it, one could travel anywhere.
so valuable is this map that
professor paradox himself divided it into four pieces and hid them throughout the galaxy.
this was aggregor's plan from the beginning.
he kidnapped those creatures for the powers they possess... powers that will allow him to survive the arduous quest for all of the pieces of the map.
i don't see why it's so important that he doesn't get a map.
it's more than just a map.
it...
it's not the map, gwen.
it's where he intends to go with it.
i'm right, aren't i?
he's going to the forge of creation.
you look terrible, grandpa.
you've got a fever.
not now, gwen.
i'm fine.
youarenotfine.
aggregor's electrical attack has damaged your entire nervous system.
my assistants will replace your damaged central nervous system with a new one.
a few weeks in a re-gen tank should do it.
after the mission, maybe.
grandpa!
you won't survive that long... not without treatment.
you have given much to the galaxy, max tennyson.
now you must rest and recover.
i still think...
do what he says, grandpa.
you kids be careful.
just like you taught us.
maybe a little more careful than that.
if aggregor can reassemble the map, he can travel to the forge of creation and gain the greatest power in the universe.
where's paradox?
why doesn't he help?
he already has.
he erected a chronal randomization barrier that hides the forge of creation from everyone except the forge's inhabitants... and whoever has the map.
got it.
we only have to stop aggregor one time out of four, and he's done.
yes, but you must succeed.
that much power in aggregor's hands would be a disaster of intergalactic proportions.
then we should get going.
on course to the
monceros system.
where are we going again?
an ancient temple on the planet mikd'lty.
oh.
this is weird.
what?
it's really close to the sun and tidally locked.
how about that?
which means the same side of the planet is always facing the sun.
yeah, completely not getting it.
sunside, the ground is molten, and the temperature's
3,600 degrees.
on the night side, it's a little cooler... 320 below zero.
this ain't gonna work.
our spacesuits will fail instantly on the hot side of the planet, and they're only good for maybe an hour on the cold side.
what are you looking at?
this is a plumber's suit, right?
i was just making sure my butt crack wasn't showing.
welcome to the twilight zone.
we're right between the hot and cold sides?
this planet is inhabited by alien colonists, keepers of an ancient temple they discovered here thousands of years ago.
that temple.
but the atmosphere's either frozen into liquid or on fire.
who could live here?
the colonists find it quite comfortable.
necrofriggians... the same race as big chill.
so they aren't bothered by the heat or the cold.
or, hopefully, us.
let me talk to them.
maybe you should leave the diplomacy to gwen.
i'm better at it than you are.
lot of room between that and "good.
yeah.
gwen?
who approaches the sacred temple?
uh, hi.
i'm gwen tennyson.
this is my cousin ben.
hey.
and my friend kevin.
'sup.
we're plumbers, and we need to go inside the temple.
this is unprecedented.
strangers are not allowed in this place... only pilgrims who seek wisdom.
me and my friends are totally okay.
see?
big chill!
ben?
when you turn back to human, you'll still be in your protective suit, right?
that's how it used to work...
before it...
broke.
if it doesn't, you've only got 10 minutes.
less if you turn into something else first.
right.
you are one of us?
i am one of everybody.
we're just going to pop inside and grab the artifact.
we'll be out in no time...
grab" one of the artifacts?
sacrilege!
is there any way that
sacrilege" means, "go right ahead"?
no.
that's too bad.
i can't use my powers unless i take off my suit.
bad idea.
let us handle it.
intangible cancels intangible.
hey!
no fair!
somnus!
echo echo!
ultimate echo echo!
thanks.
let them go.
without a guide, the temple's defenses will make short work of them.
how much time before you revert?
i ultimized.
who knows how bad that kills the battery?
if you time out, you're cooked.
or frozen...
i'm not sure which.
so we better hurry.
this way.
that can't be good.
i didn't know you could armor up that fast.
you know, with the proper incentive...
that stone's been on this planet for thousands of years.
you should be safe from the elements.
this place is probably full of booby traps.
we'll have to be careful.
if i'm lucky, i've got maybe five minutes left before i change back.
no time to be careful.
let's just run through here like maniacs.
now you're talking sense.
nothing scares me more than when you two agree.
talk while you're moving.
maybe you should follow me?
i'm the one who can sense the map piece with her powers.
right.
magic up the thing... uh, whatever you call it.
this way.
i was thinking, instead of ultimate echo echo, shouldn't your name be ultimate echo ultimate echo?
ben, hurry up!
this is totally acid!
it's probably liquid methane.
which is also not good for swimming.
which way?
really?
'cause i think there's something in there.
yeah, see?
let's go!
i'm on a schedule.
come on, already.
let's see what you've got!
guess who's made out of stuff you can't hurt.
say good night.
nice.
we're close.
the map is that way.
guess it was my turn.
did they finally run out of ammo?
our weight on the floor was the trigger.
nasty.
careful.
they probably got poison on them.
it's behind this door.
we need more muscle.
just what
i was thinking.
four arms!
great.
now how do we get in there?
you don't.
i do.
try not to drop it until i come back.
i think i've been...
gwen!
wake up!
we've got to get her out from under here.
and fast.
i'm going to change back any minute.
as a human...
i get it.
we're all pulped.
it's a puzzle, all right.
aggregor!
always a pleasure to see you, tennyson... particularly when you're doing my work for me.
what are you talking about?
this temple is a dangerous place, so i thought
i'd let you and your friends trigger the traps and lead me to the prize.
i do appreciate you holding the door for me, levin.
and they say young osmosians have no manners.
she doesn't look well at all.
i swear, i'll...
stand there holding that stone over your head until you can't any longer, then drop it and kill your friends?
this isn't over.
while it's always a pleasure defeating you again and again...
i'm afraid this is the last time.
aggregor!
what are you doing?
i'll hold it up.
go get gwen!
hurry!
back to the ship.
let's go!
how do we get past the darts?
i know a shortcut.
why do we always park so far away?
oh, man!
what happened?
you took a poison dart for the team.
oh.
yeah.
but the plumber first-aid kit has a universal poison antiserum.
okay.
but why does ben have a sunburn on half his face?
i forgot my sunblock?
aggregor got the map.
we lost.
we didn't lose.
we lived to fight another day.
and aggregor better watch his step, 'cause that day's coming soon.
__file_terminal__
this is a story of britain... but a britain that we rarely see.
britain as an undiscovered country.
we're travelling from the south of england to the far north of scotland, exploring the best the british countryside has to offer.
we'll be taking the long way round because this journey is about getting off the beaten track.
'we're going in search of the secret...'
it's absolutely amazing.
'the forgotten...
'the unexpected...
'the lost treasures of our landscapes.'
oh, man, honestly,
i can't stop smiling.
'we asked you to share secret places... 'the little known, the deserted, the hard to get to...'
oh, i'm hooked in ivy.
urgh.
where have you brought me?
'and we'll be sharing our own hidden gems.'
look at this for a view.
absolutely extraordinary.
'over four weeks, we're journeying through the last great wildernesses of our amazing country, 'the place we call home.'
so this is it.
'we're looking to reclaim the hidden and the overlooked, 'to find the pieces of our history that might have slipped between the cracks.'
this is incredible.
'secrets kept in shadow, waiting for their moment in the sun.
'every road taken is an opportunity to explore.
oh, hey!
oh, yes!
this is secret britain.
in our journey through britain, we've already discovered that it's possible to find true wilderness in the crowded south.
this is absolutely incredible.
what a spot.
now we're on the second leg of our epic adventure, and this time, we're travelling from the flatlands of the east right across to the wild and rugged welsh coast.
we're each taking very different routes across england's hidden heart, looking for secret britain in the land of incredible contrast.
and i'm starting here - the norfolk broads.
this is britain's largest protected wetland, a stunning 188 square miles of lakes and rivers.
it's easy to forget that this watery wilderness is all man-made, the result of excavations that began over 1,000 years ago.
this whole area was once manually dug for peat, and when sea levels rose it all naturally flooded, creating this waterscape of reeds, windmills, boats and utter peace.
sailing along here isn't just the best way to see the quieter parts of the broads - it's the only way.
although these waters can get busy with over 12,000 boats each year,
i'm looking for the one part of the broads that's hardly ever visited.
a real treat, right off the beaten track.
somewhere hidden behind this reed bed is an island, but because of these reeds, it looks so similar to everything else, you'd never know it was there.
it's one of norfolk's best kept secrets.
it's known as heigham holmes.
even from the air, it's hard to see amongst the narrow channels and tall reed beds, but these 500 acres are truly cut off, as getting on to this secret island is far from straightforward.
thankfully, farmer john stafford knows the way.
john, how are we doing?
all right?
not too bad.
how are you?
i'm very good.
i tell you what, i'm very, very intrigued about this bridge here.
is it a bridge?
is that what you call it?
the locals know it as martham ferry, but it actually is a floating bridge.
first, we'll unlock it.
yeah.
so we're all padlocked.
then we pull... this chain here.
right, so we just literally grab the chains and pull ourselves across?
yes.
it hinges...
in that corner.
..from that point.
'it's one of just 13 floating bridges in the country, 'and it's the only way onto this island.'
it's a brilliant bit of kit, this.
and how long have you been doing this for?
how many years?
oh... 25 years. 25 years?
'there's one last trick to this unusual bridge.'
here we go.
here comes the tipping point.
gently does it.
brilliant.
absolutely superb.
i tell you what, who needs modern technology when you've got something that's as brilliant as that?
it's idiot-proof, isn't it?
matt chuckles
'and that's how you unlock the secret of heigham holmes.
'this island was once private farmland, 'but since the national trust bought it in 1987, 'it's open to visitors for just one day every september.
'for the rest of the year,
'heigham holmes is a wildlife refuge and pasture.
'the only other visitor is the island's warden, stephen prowse.'
it's certainly a very quiet spot.
not a lot of people know it's here.
i had a job finding it.
yes, you won't be alone in that.
many of the locals in the village just up the road had no idea it was here when we started having our annual open day.
so we manage it as a sanctuary.
the broads is perhaps one of the last wilderness areas in southern england.
heigham holmes is one of the remotest parts of that.
it's really rather special.
once a shallow hill rising out of the fens,
heigham holmes became cut off as the rivers rose.
over the years, its banks have been built up to stop the pastures from flooding, so now much of the island actually lies below sea level.
and it does seem to arc a little bit, does it?
yes, that's right.
i say the upland - people laugh... but it's a metre above sea level.
the whole site resembles a fried egg.
you've got the white, which is the low-lying area, which is below sea level, and then you've got the high level, which is the yolk, the little yellow bit, with the buildings.
it was the island's inaccessibility that led to this dairy farm being abandoned in the '60s.
heigham homes isn't just a secret in itself.
it holds a secret in its recent past.
we've got an aerial photograph of heigham holmes in 1946, and here are the barns where we're at the moment.
you can see there's evidence of a secret runway.
a secret runway?
yes, a secret runway here.
this was used by 161 squadron as a forward landing strip during the second world war.
from here, we think they flew agents and spies, saboteurs, out to occupied europe.
any idea why they used this island?
basically, it was remote, and because of the floodbanks you couldn't see over.
you couldn't see what was going on.
a pretty special place.
it's seen a lot in its time.
it has.
it looks really calm, as if nothing would go on at all.
there are still people who don't really believe there was ever a runaway.
even from above, there's no trace of that runway now.
it's some tranquil spot.
absolutely amazing.
i can spend a whole day here without speaking to a single person, which is quite special in this part of the world.
you must love it here as the warden.
i do.
i'm extremely privileged to be out here.
you see a lot of wildlife, and you commune with nature.
it's really good.
it's a place to get away from it all and do your work and go home with a satisfied grin on your face.
the open grassland and big skies are quintessentially norfolk... but a hidden norfolk, one that few people ever get to see.
you really can sense the secrecy that inspired our spies to use it.
the wonderful thing is, it still feels like a secret today.
heigham holmes isn't the only secret of the east.
time to leave the flatlands of norfolk behind, travelling north to some of the more forgotten parts of lincolnshire.
lincolnshire has a reputation for being very flat, but it's not that flat.
i mean, i'm definitely going up a hill.
it's a little hill, but it is a hill.
that's because i'm in the little-visited lincolnshire wolds.
come on, dear.
they're an expansive landscape of rolling chalk hills.
in fact, this is the highest spot in eastern england.
it's a giant golf ball!
claxby radar station at the top of the wolds adds a touch of mystery to the place.
but i'm here to delve deeper into another of lincolnshire's unexpected wonders.
the humber estuary is to the north and the wash is to the south, but never the less, lincolnshire is one of the driest counties in britain.
but in the depths of these chalk hills lies a hidden water world.
'and the man who knows how to find it is richard chadd.'
hi, richard.
how are you?
i'm fine.
welcome to lincolnshire wolds.
thanks.
where are we heading?
down a chalk spring down here.
it's deep and inaccessible and damp... you'll need scruffy clothes and wellies.
ok, i shall put exactly that on.
'the hidden world we're off to find is a tiny chalk spring, 'one of the most protected and rarest of habitats in britain.'
what's so special about this chalk spring?
well, you can see all around you it's very intensively managed landscape.
this one is so deep and steep that it's probably untouched for hundreds of years, so it's been left to nature, really.
'richard is a scientist who monitors the health of these hidden springs.'
so through here?
through here, yeah.
lead the way.
'and he's got permission to show me one that's on private land.'
lots of nettles to battle through.
absolutely.
bits of hawthorn, too.
watch yourself on those.
suddenly we are... in deep, deep foliage.
yes, indeed.
you can see how steep it is.
yep.
gosh.
we're in the lost kingdom.
that's it.
it gets really steep here so you have to...
where's the ladder?
you could do with one of those!
you have to use the ivy instead.
yep.
ooh.
and you can feel it's getting quite cold, too.
yeah, the temperature is dropping.
you were not kidding when you said it's steep.
oh, i'm hooked in ivy.
ugh.
oh.
where have you brought me?
he chuckles and here we are.
'too steep to farm, this woodland is wild and natural.
'it's a landscape in miniature.'
so suddenly we've got all these ferns and lush species that you wouldn't get anywhere but in this habitat.
that's it.
i can see why you love it so much.
it's fabulous.
nobody has messed with this for hundreds of years.
it's a magical place, i think.
'and the reason it's here at all is this crystal-clear spring water.'
feel how cold it is.
blimey.
yeah.
it's almost like having a remnant of the mountains in the middle of the english lowlands.
'chilled by its journey through the chalk, 'the water emerges at a constant temperature in both summer and winter, 'helping the native flora, 'like these hart's tongue ferns, to grow in abundance.'
there's liverworts and mosses on all the boulders around here.
some of them... are quite nice.
this one here.
she sniffs
oooh, wow.
you can't quite describe what the smell is...
no... but it's rather nice.
what is it?
it's a sort of muted mint.
that's right, sort of.
yeah.
it's called scented liverworts.
never smelt anything like that before.
very fresh.
it is.
it's not edible?
no.
don't eat it.
not as far as i know.
i've never tried it.
we won't try it now.
'even though it's tricky to get down here, 'these little ribbons show that we're not the only visitors.'
what are these?
people have been here.
people find this place very precious indeed for spiritual reasons.
i guess you've got the water coming out the bones of the earth, so they've put these in.
i don't know what they mean, but it's a precious place to somebody.
mind yourself - there's a little waterfall just here.
a spring right here.
oh, look.
it's a little one, but it's a waterfall.
it isn't exactly towering.
when i found this, i told somebody i'd found a little waterfall, and they didn't believe me.
you don't get waterfalls in lincolnshire.
what's the definition?
within a habitat survey, the definition is the water has got to leave the rock face surface, which it does.
it certainly does.
and if it doesn't leave the rock face?
it's called a chute.
a chute.
yes.
it's not exactly niagara, but...
but it's something.
especially for lincolnshire.
'although many of these natural water sources are on private land, 'you can visit some of the 18 chalk streams 'that flow throughout the wolds.
'they add a beauty and a diversity to the landscape.'
south of the soft springs and rolling hills of lincolnshire is another landscape shaped by chalk.
a place where secret britain can be found in our imaginations.
in no time, they arrived through windy woods and at the ruin...
'author carrie king has written a children's book 'about a girl called joni-pip and her adventures in barton hills.'
are you all right, pops?" asked joni-pip anxiously...
this place relates to joni-pip's world... she lives on the edge of a hill and she spends lots of time up in the hills and in the woods and amongst the trees with her friends.
the circulites are fans of joni-pip.
this place is actually a place which is in the book and it's what we call our secret place, so we usually come here quite often to hang out.
18, 19...
they love to roam all over the countryside and just have fun and play hide-and-seek.
just like run around and mess about, shouting.
they do all the things children used to do, and they act out parts of the book.
i'm going to pretend to give it to liam, and i hand it to you.
and they decide to go to their secret place, barton caves.
barton caves, our secret place.
that sounds fun.
barton caves are actually not caves at all.
they're just the roots of the trees, where the chalk has been worn away, and underneath the roots are these wonderful alcoves, almost... coves where i used to play as a little girl, and where children play today.
a writer always writes to be read, and the most beautiful part about being a writer is when people really love, not just what you write but the places you write about, and it just gives me such a thrill to think these people just love it here
and they just want to come as much as they can.
it's just really exciting.
back on my journey, i'm entering the hidden heart of britain.
i'm just north of leek, in the quieter corner of the peak district.
a place full of forgotten treasures just waiting to be discovered.
this is a landscape that promises to satisfy any superstition.
i'm looking for a man.
a hard man.
a man made of stone.
where is he?
there he is!
known as the winking man, this rock has a gleam in its eye that's supposed to help women get pregnant - so the story goes.
this local character is part of a sharp gritstone escarpment that marks the south western edge of the peak district.
named from the french word "roche", meaning rock, this ridge is known as the roaches.
this one, known as the bawdstone, is no exception.
apparently, if you get under here, then you can literally get the devil off your back.
oh, it looks quite tight, but to be honest,
i need every bit of help that i can get.
ah.
there he goes, yep.
oh.
i think he's gone.
in the past, pagans visited this rock for its healing powers.
but christians attempted to purify the stone each year by painting it white... right up until the 1940s.
now nature has reclaimed it for its own.
higher up, the roaches have been sculpted by the elements.
you can see how all these bizarrely-shaped rocks have captured people's imagination.
look at this giant lizard lurking behind me.
'over time, our stories have given these stones their enigmatic quality.'
rock formations like these often hold secrets and myths deep within their crevices.
the roaches really exude this craggy mystery.
every rock, every giant boulder, holds a secret.
or so it seems.
all across the hidden heart of britain, there are secrets waiting to be explored.
at the northern end of the roaches, the land rolls down into back forest.
buried deep in these woods is another forgotten piece of our history.
now, i'm on my way to ludchurch.
all i really know all is that it isn't a church, but it is a place that's shrouded in myths and legends.
'ludchurch is so well concealed in the forest 'that my only chance of finding it 'is with local historian doug pickford.'
how did you come across this?
i was born here, so it's been a playground forever.
a great place to hide in.
even robin hood, little john - they were hiding away in here.
'there are tales that many of history's renegades took refuge in ludchurch.'
just here on the right, is it?
here we are.
oh, wow!
yeah.
it looks pretty eerie through there!
you ain't seen nothing yet.
oh, this is something else.
'we're descending into a rocky cleft 400 ft long and 50 ft deep.'
oh, my word!
doesn't that look magical?
'a damp chasm, draped in moss and ferns.'
it's tropical, almost.
'legend has it that this crevice was made by the devil, 'slashing the earth with his fingernail...
'..creating a deep wound.'
what a place.
isn't it?
there are all these little natural alcoves.
they're everywhere.
'according to folklore, ludchurch was a primeval place of worship 'dating back before the druids.
'you can understand how the shapes in the rock might inspire fear or reverence.'
you can see why people worshipped here.
from very early times right up to present day - still people come down today.
it is a great hidey-hole as well.
coming off that path you'd never know it was here.
perfect, it's a fantastic place for that.
'it's fairly certain that in the 15th century one group of runaways did hide here.
'the lollards were religious dissenters, widely condemned as heretics.
'on the run from their oppressors, 'this is where they met and worshipped in secret.'
the altar up there, you can imagine the congregation down here.
what, so he'd have been stood about where i am now?
he'd have been stood here, and you've got the congregation here.
and just imagine the voices, 100 or 200 voices down here, echoing...
singing.
singing away.
it would have been absolutely amazing.
you can just kind of sense the activity that has gone on here.
you feel the presence of that which has gone before.
'not only is ludchurch hidden in the landscape, 'it also seems to be hidden in our history.'
there's hardly any written records of this place at all.
that's really surprising, when you think about the activity that's gone on here.
i know, i know.
i like folklore, and whatever the folklore is, there's a grain of truth in it.
it is, in a way, nice that there hasn't been much written about it, because it keeps its mystery and it magic.
it keeps its awe.
'ludchurch is one of those places you remember long after you leave.'
of all the secret places that i've visited so far, there's something very different about ludchurch, that's disguised under this grassy bank, in that... people have used it to keep their secrets.
it's a really sobering thought that we can come here today and enjoy it, you know, come here for pleasure, and yet, you think about all those people who have come here in the past and they've used it for protection.
they've used it because they're in fear of losing their lives.
just south of ludchurch is another vestige of the forgotten history...
rudyard lake.
the river dane leads us to the lake, whose allure lies in its glamorous and romantic past.
the secret starts here, where some of the dane's waters are diverted down a channel.
this might look natural and wild and swampy, but in fact it's man-made, dug out in the early 1800s by hand.
its purpose was to fill a valley and create a 2.5-mile-long reservoir.
rudyard lake was intended to feed britain's ever-growing system of canals... the vital arteries of the industrial revolution.
today, it's a haven for locals to enjoy, but it wasn't always that way.
it's difficult to imagine, but this quiet backwater was once a tourist hotspot.
'and to take me on a trip down memory lane...'
here comes my lift.
'..
is rudyard lake's ranger, ray perry.
hi, ray.
hello, fancy meeting you here.
hello, hello.
just catch hold of the end.
good landing!
perfect.
the best we could.
pleased to meet you.
nice to meet you.
i'll put this on.
you have to be careful around here, it's a very romantic place.
it's supposed to be the third most romantic spot in the country.
we might fall in love!
i don't know the other two.
i'll leave you to do all the hard work.
you'll not want to do hard work.
old-fashioned in that way.
why not, why not?
'we're at the lake's northern end, 'what was once rudyard's most exclusive spot.'
over on my left hand side here is what was to be the first golf course to be built in north staffordshire, back in 1906.
it opened as a nine-hole course, and the golfers built a little chalet for themselves to be their tenth hole.
looking at some of the old postcard pictures of it, it was full of paraffin lamps and linen tablecloths, really for the hoi polloi, as you might say, of the day.
you see, if i look at that now and try and imagine back to the 1920s,
i've got great gatsby, i've got them in their plus fours...
that's right... with their golf clubs casually slung over their shoulders.
you can see why the upper crust would want to hang out here.
it was a golf club with vistas.
so lovely were the views from the 17th hole, they named it paradise.
and now the cows are enjoying the shoreline.
that's right.
'although there's nothing left of the golf club, 'these restored boathouses hark back to rudyard's bygone era.'
so what are we coming up to here?
this is known as the lady of the lake.
it was built back in 1898 for a wealthy local family.
this was their weekend retreat?
very much so.
they'd use it obviously to keep their boats underneath.
it's positively grand compared to some of the wooden cabins along the bank.
there's a statue.
they gave a lot of thought to it, because they actually built that little alcove in the chimney area especially to accommodate it.
the lady of the lake.
'rudyard lake's glamorous past 'all began back in 1829 with the building of its railway line.
'the trains brought a constant stream of day-trippers, 'and with boating, tea rooms and entertainment all on offer, 'the lake became a thriving tourist spot.
'on one day in 1877, 'more than 25,000 people gathered to watch captain webb, 'the first man to swim the english channel, 'swim the length of the lake.
'since the 1960s, with the decline of local railways,
'rudyard lake's crowds have disappeared.'
the nice thing about rudyard today, i think, is that the southern end, the other end of the lake than we are currently at, is commercialised, in inverted commas, whereas this end remains, much as it's ever done,
a very tranquil, scenic spot.
'and forever a romantic one.'
amongst the thousands of tourists who once visited these banks, two fell in love and married in 1865.
they named their first-born after the lake.
he became one of britain's greatest writers
rudyard kipling.
leaving behind the memories of rudyard lake, i'm delving deeper into england's hidden heart, a world where there's more to the landscape than meets the eye.
since the 17th century, the peak district has been britain's largest limestone producer.
everywhere you look, you can see how the search for this versatile stone has left its mark.
and it's here that i'm beginning my search for our next strange secret.
this route is known as the high peak trail, and it follows the line of the old railway which was built in 1830 and was used to carry all of this limestone from the quarries down to the canals.
not only was this one of the earliest railways to be built, as my thighs are finding out, it was also one of the steepest.
which is why they built an engine at the top, to haul the wagons back up the hill.
middleton engine house is the only one that survives of the nine that once dotted the high peak railway.
but one of the biggest legacies of that industry is here, at middleton moor.
and it's almost invisible.
you could walk across this whole moor without the faintest idea of what lies beneath.
hidden under the moor is the only limestone mine in the uk.
to understand the secrets of this landscape,
i need to burrow right through it... with the only people that know how.
now then, lads!
hello, matt.
how we doing?
very well, thank you.
you?
are you all right in there, derek?
yes, thanks.
welcome to middleton.
you're good?
super stuff.
what's the plan?
we're going to do an inspection of the mine.
you're going to navigate us, so don't get us lost, will you?
ok.
now disused, the mine is kept safely under lock and key.
jeremy hewitt is in charge of its safety.
in we go, then.
since middleton mine closed in 2005, it's been stripped of all equipment.
so the only light in these tunnels is from our headlamps.
just going down what we call the main drag.
right.
massive, isn't it?
it is.
it's a lot bigger than i was expecting, to be honest with you.
i thought it would be quite...
you know, a feeling of real claustrophobia.
yes.
you come in here and you think we're going to be scraping the sides if you're driving through it, but they are enormous.
they are.
they were actually cut to allow 30-tonne dumpers to drive in and out.
in fact, you could get a double-decker bus through this immense subterranean labyrinth.
middleton mine was created because it was cheaper to mine this deep limestone than to quarry it.
since the 1950s, miners have carved out 26 miles of tunnel.
your initial reaction is that it's like an underground world.
it's like a main high street, and then all these little roads leading up.
yes.
large square pillars have been left to stop the roof from caving in.
so we're just coming up to what was the first developed area.
jeremy's taking me to the mine's largest cavern.
this is enormous, jeremy, isn't it?
it is.
it certainly is.
it's an amazing structure that developed over quite a lot of working.
yeah.
it's like a cathedral, almost.
the roof here is very flat.
it's like ripples of sand on the beach or something.
yeah.
and that's broken out very cleanly.
this is an ancient seabed, formed 280 million years ago.
the limestone is prized for its purity.
the mine once produced 120,000 tons of it a year.
what's left is middleton moor's hidden maze.
it's an extraordinary creation.
i remember the first few times i came down, thinking this is amazing, just like yourself, in absolute wonder.
and so deep down, below the moor, that i feel quite privileged to come here and have a look around.
all those sheep up there, totally oblivious of what's going on underground.
yeah.
before i see daylight again,
jeremy wants to show me one of the mine's potential dangers.
this big boulder down here fell out probably 18 months ago, and although there has been one or two small spills since then, it's pretty stable, so i'm happy with it and we're not worrying about it.
there's a junction here.
i, er, left the map in the car.
it's ok.
i know where we are.
matt laughs
so now we're up here, we're over the main road again.
if you just climb carefully onto this bank, we can look down at the truck.
i see where we are now.
what a view from up here.
that's super, isn't it?
yeah, but we'll not get too close.
there's not many mines where you have to worry about such big drops.
mostly you're crawling around on your hands and knees.
but not here.
the caverns of middleton mine inspire awe and respect.
being in here requires constant vigilance.
in the 70s, two sections of the mine collapsed, causing tonnes of land to move... and making its mark on the moor above.
and this is the area where the mine collapsed.
it's the only sign of the secret that lies below.
ah, yes.
it looks perfectly circular.
just like a natural hollow.
from the air, you can just make out the square shapes of the limestone pillars beneath.
a ghostly epitaph, written in the landscape, to middleton mine.
to the south, the hills of shropshire conceal the enigmatic silvington common.
it's a place where secret britain can be found in one man's memories.
for derek markham, this common defines his family history.
when i come to silvington common, the first place i head for is this tree.
my mother used to meet my dad here in the wartime.
that's the only way they could meet in private.
my dad was stationed down there, in the war, in 1941, and my mum actually ran away to be with him.
she was 18, he was 20, and they were sweethearts.
they would meet here.
this was where they said their hellos and their goodbyes and they did their courting.
it was a lovers' tree, really.
and she wouldn't leave the tree until my father had gone back safely through all the sheep tracks and got back to the camp.
where he would wave his white vest to let her know that he had arrived.
my parents were totally devoted to each other.
they got married two years after they used to meet here, and they kept coming back here and coming back here, and we would spend so much time around here.
i think one of the earliest memories i have is actually coming out from this tree and picking bilberries in the area.
and we brought our family up here.
it's very emotional because i know that my mother will always be here.
she always wanted to be here.
she never wanted to be away from here.
and we scattered her ashes around here.
this place is really part of what i am.
and i really don't think many people pass this way.
it's almost exclusive to my family and our thoughts and our memories.
and it's just so beautiful.
west of shropshire lies the welsh border.
here, the landscape gets ever more rugged, and the secrets more difficult to get to.
snowdonia national park is one of our great treasures.
for centuries, the welsh have called these mountains
the place of the eagle".
eryri.
i'm heading for the hanging gardens of snowdonia, that grow somewhere in a valley called cwm idwal.
my guide is nature reserve manager hywel roberts.
morning, hywel.
good morning, and it certainly is a glorious morning.
isn't it?
you don't expect this every time in snowdonia.
in my experience, no.
but it's a nice surprise.
it is indeed.
so what is it you want to show me today?
what i really want to show you is cwm idwal, one of the most special nature reserves and valleys in snowdonia.
this is the most southerly place in britain, where arctic plants still grow.
but it's better known for its spectacular landscape, created during the ice age.
now, julia, welcome to cwm idwal.
we're right on the shore of llyn idwal, now.
ah.
so this is it.
it's like being in the lake district.
well, a bit better, i'd say.
of course you would!
well of course, parts of the lake district were created by glaciation.
and here you've got classic signs of glaciation.
this imposing amphitheatre was sculpted by ice more than 12,000 years ago.
and the lake is a watery reminder of the glacier that once flowed down this valley.
but the secret here is the hanging garden.
plants left over from the ice age.
they survive in a place they call the devil's kitchen.
it's quite a scary name, isn't it?
well, the reason it's got the name devil's kitchen is because sailors in the olden days looking at this place from the irish sea would see clouds rising out of this valley here, up towards the summits.
and they would have thought of that almost like a boiling cauldron.
it's a dark foreboding place, but to be appreciated.
it's the plants that grow on its high ledges that we're searching for.
so, hywel, as we climb deeper and deeper into the crevice, what other sorts of plants and flowers are we looking for?
we're looking for more montane plants, plants we'll find on the shelves and perhaps in the crevices between the boulders.
if we look carefully in a minute, i think we might start seeing some roseroot.
ah, directly ahead of us.
growing out of that crag, there.
oh, yeah.
the next crag we come to is absolutely full of vegetation.
hence the term "hanging gardens.
finally, at 2,000 feet, we find them.
careful.
now, i completely get what you say by "hanging garden.
you can see that it's a really lush, deep vegetation there.
can you see the mass of roseroot that's there?
imagine just down below us, when we stopped below, it was just that one little plant.
but there, a mass of it.
and absolutely full of rare plants.
look at the mossy saxifrage here.
the place is full of plants.
i love the tree over there, just hanging off the rock.
what are the roots bedded into?
there's just that little bit of nutrient there.
it's given peace and quiet, no grazing, and off it goes.
look what you've got there.
a fully grown mountain ash.
woodland growing out of rockland.
amazing.
12,000 years ago, arctic plants lived on the mountain peaks that rose up above the ice.
since the glaciers disappeared, they still survive, clinging on to these chilly north-east facing crags.
just think of the thousands of people that go past here, storming up to the top of the mountain, just to say, "we've been to a 3,0ooft peak.
but what did they see?
did they actually see the rare plants?
did they see the lost world?
indeed.
and what a gem it is.
it's this craggy landscape that keeps wales' secrets so well hidden.
leaving snowdonia, we're heading south, to a place deep in the slate mountains.
a secret spot for three generations of the hinds family.
and a location only shared with friends and family.
about 50 years ago, a friend said,
do you know where the blue pool is?
and i said, of course, "no." and i was shown where it was.
and i've been coming here ever since.
it was like a little adventure, because you're walking up into a slate mine, which is very welsh, and then you have to go through these bridges.
up there, up that path there, to your left.
and then onto the terrace.
lovely.
see, look.
you came up through the trees and you came through those two bridges.
the map came about because there was a family that wanted to know how to get to the blue pool.
so i decided to draw a picture, which was more artistic, for other people to find the blue pool.
and there's a tunnel which leads to the blue pool in the quarry.
even though it is sometimes quite wet...
and you don't know what you're going to find.
and then you suddenly come out on to this area and see this water.
which, on a day like today, reflects the blue sky, and it's just beautiful.
oh, it's quite nice.
i brought jasmin when she was a baby.
i think she came when she was two.
it became a place to come to.
it was always the place we'd come.
and it was fun.
it's a nice place to paddle in the pool and have a nice time, really.
quite often we come in the morning and we'll be here for a few hours and never see another person.
a lot of fish up there, isn't there?
yes.
a lot of trout.
yes, trout.
there's one...
and i love to watch those up there.
they skim the surface, catching the flies.
just generally seeing the family playing around and skimming stones, etcetera.
whoa!
look at that one.
that's going!
nearly made it.
the water's so still and you can get it to bounce probably 20 times.
ding, ding, ding...
right the way across and ping!
off the far wall.
psshung!
almost!
it's an art form.
bing, bing, bing...
you won't find it in any brochures.
i think people rely on other people to tell them.
and it's worth the effort because of the scenery and the views and the pool.
it's just a nice place to come and enjoy the day.
we'll let the hinds keep the blue pool for themselves and move on to the rugged wilds of the welsh coast in the far south west.
our final destination on this leg of our journey.
pembrokeshire coast national park protects over 150,000 acres of shoreline.
but before i explore the vertical landscape of these dramatic cliffs,
i'm taking a detour to one of pembrokeshire's secluded little treasures.
tucked away behind broadhaven beach.
i reckon that this beach is a real gem in itself, but i am told that just behind it is something really, really special.
and if i follow this trickle, all should be revealed.
this water flows from an enchanting series of lakes.
these are the bosherston lily ponds... that nestle in a steep valley behind the coast.
what a contrast these ponds are.
it feels so protected from that offshore wind, because it's kind of framed by this thick canopy of woodland and it's so peaceful.
it's so tranquil here that all you can hear... is the sound of the birds.
chirruping
bosherston's secret is its water lilies that burst into bloom each june.
the pond's clear water comes from underground springs.
down here, it's one of the richest, fresh water habitats in europe.
but perhaps the biggest surprise is that these 80 acres of pond are all man-made.
they were created in the 18th century by the earls of cawdor who once owned the valley.
they wanted a garden pond on a grand scale.
so they brought in a canal engineer and one beautiful evening, in 1794, he took a stroll down to the beach where i've just come from and he had a vision and that vision was of water flooding these valleys.
so beautiful was that thought, that he came up with the idea along with the cawdors of damming the river right at its mouth to create this.
so the cawdors got their garden pond and pembrokeshire got a hidden gem.
more than 200 years later, anyone can enjoy this haven.
they can also see the remains of the cawdor's manor.
on the very last leg of our journey,
i'm moving just two miles west of bosherston.
this coast was also once owned by the earls of cawdor but today it's occupied by someone entirely different.
it's one of the many places where the army practice their manoeuvres.
an eight-mile stretch of coast known as the castlemartin firing range and like many other mod ranges, it's not always open to visitors.
you can walk along the pembrokeshire coast on the coast path but you only get access to this particular section when, of course, there's no training going on.
but it is worth the wait because just over there where the land stops and the sea starts are some of the most spectacular sea cliffs in britain.
someone who knows the best way to explore
castlemartin is climber, libby peter.
it's all open in there.
is it safe to go in?
it's all open, the flag's down.
we've got a clear run, anywhere we want to go.
anywhere where we like?
well, speaking of which, you should lead the way.
ready for an adventure?
definitely.
you can get access to castlemartin's eastern range every weekend.
and there are seven miles of trails on some of the wildest sections of the pembrokeshire coastal walk.
for climbers like libby, it's all a brilliant backstage pass.
this is an incredible place.
oh, my word.
isn't it amazing?
look at that!
oh, man.
yes.
it's called "huntsman's leap".
it gets your belly when you look over.
yes.
some of the routes, you can only access at low tide.
oh, yes.
you can see them down the bottom.
they look really small, don't they?
hello.
hello!
there's some amazing, world class climbing.
you don't want to go in here unless you know that you can get back out.
we don't need to start off in here, matt.
right.
we'll come here later, shall we?
castlemartin's cliffs offer climbers of all levels a chance to get close to nature.
and very soon, i'll be joining them.
well we're drastically running out of land so i guess we're nearly here.
yes, this is the top of the climb.
oh, my word.
somewhere down there is a tried and tested route, known as blue sky.
the idea is to abseil down and climb back up.
libby will lead and i'll follow.
it's really happening.
i'm afraid it is.
oh, gosh.
ok.
yes, no turning back now.
yes.
how far down is the sea?
at the moment?
it's at the end of the rope.
ok.
how long's your rope?
it's probably 50 metres or so.
ok.
if you hit the sea, then you've gone too far.
right.
ok?
oh, my word.
that is a long way down.
libby's climbed here for 20 years so it's no time before she's reached the sea.
now, it's my turn.
as soon as i drop over the edge here, the only way out is back up this rope.
and as weird as it feels, i'm off.
once over the edge, i'm in a different world.
look at this for a view.
it's absolutely extraordinary.
nearly there, libby.
there's a nice ledge to stand on there.
is this all right?
yes, come to there.
what a spot this is.
it's crystal clear water.
think it looks inviting?
do you know what?
i was just thinking, i wouldn't mind having a little dip but i bet it's a bit nippy.
there is a special sense of isolation down here.
but with the tide creeping up the cliff, it's time to start climbing.
right then.
blue sky, here we come.
it's libby's job to secure our rope to the cliff as she goes up.
have you got enough slack?
is that all right?
yes, that's good.
that's great.
that looks a bit hairy round that outside.
quite an odd feeling when your climber disappears.
once libby's safe and on a ledge, it's my turn.
ok, libby?
yes, i'm ready when you are.
climbing now.
ok!
blue sky.
stand by.
oh, it's lovely rock.
this is the secret of castlemartin.
it's the way the sea exploits the cracks in the limestone cliffs that's created fantastic gullies, overhangs and sea stacks.
a vertical landscape and a limitless playground for climbers.
you've got to look at this.
you can see the way that all this limestone has been weathered.
yeah.
the rock formation's incredible there, isn't it?
yes.
really sharp.
sharp edges.
like it's been made to climb this, isn't it?
i think it probably has been, yes.
what a lovely day for a cruise.
hello!
that's it.
this is the first stage then?
yes.
please tell me you've got a picnic ready?
yes, we've got some wine chilling in the cabinet there!
i thought this ledge would be a little bit bigger than it is.
this is quite palatial.
this is massive(!
) yes.
yeah.
after our pit stop, libby's off again to mark the rest of the route.
climb when you're ready, matt!
climbing!
while libby had breezed up the cliff with ease, it wasn't turning out that way for me.
this is so annoying.
i can't see that hand cord at all.
castlemartin's secret world was turning into a bit of a trial.
i think i'm a bit knackered here.
are you on that nice ledge then?
i'm not, to be fair i think i've come a route that i shouldn't really have bothered.
maybe i should have stayed up to the right of where i am, but i'm going to work my way around.
ok.
do you know, as lovely as places like this are, when you're hanging on by your fingertips, really the view is the last thing you're thinking about!
but i'm sure it looks lovely behind me.
oh!
goodness me!
that was tricky back there.
i've just found a new route.
blue sky variation.
yes.
it's the secret britain route.
yes!
no-one's ever been there before.
and probably never, ever again either.
yes!
you're all right.
last little bit.
oh, i know.
that's it.
well done!
yes!
big hugs.
yeah.
don't lean back.
yeah.
brilliant.
that was terrific, i tell you.
at times it was hairy, but when you do take a moment just to catch your breath...
well done.
even if the view was just of this!
this is secret britain at its best.
a place that only seabirds can call home.
but it's ours to discover.
that really does feel like the calm after the storm and i have an exhausted sense of achievement.
but i've got the war wounds to prove that i really have been part of this landscape.
i've literally been clinging on to it with my fingertips.
but i can now just sit back, look at this place and think that i've experienced it in a way that not many people have.
we've journeyed from east to west, crossing a land full of contrasts.
we've uncovered hidden water worlds in the east, forgotten fokelore in the heart of england... and seen wild wales in the west.
it's a journey that's shown us incredible beauty, lying just off the beaten track.
but there are plenty more secrets just waiting to be discovered.
we're only halfway on our adventure as we travel the length of britain.
next time, we're back on the road north to find the secrets hidden away amongst the country's best known beauty spots.
i'll be visiting a dramatic waterfall in one of cumbria's undiscovered valleys.
oh, man.
honestly.
i cannot stop smiling.
while i'm heading underground to see yorkshire's famous three peaks country in a whole new light.
it's absolutely amazing.
subtitles by red bee media ltd
e-mail subtitling@bbc.
co. uk
__file_terminal__
this is a story of britain, but a britain that we very rarely see.
britain as an undiscovered country.
we're travelling from the southern tip of england to the far north of scotland, exploring the best the british countryside has to offer.
but we are going to be taking the long way round, because this journey is all about getting off the beaten track.
'we're going in search of the secret...
oh, yes!
gorgeous.
'..
the forgotten, 'the unexpected, the lost treasures our landscapes.'
this is absolutely incredible.
what a spot!
'we asked you to share your secret places... 'the little known, the hard to get to, 'the deserted.'
who could fail to get lost in a place like this?
'and we'll be sharing our own hidden gems.'
oh, look at this for a view!
it's absolutely extraordinary.
'over the next four weeks, we're going to be journeying through 'the last great wildernesses of our country, 'this astonishing place we call home.'
it's absolutely amazing.
'we're looking to reclaim the hidden and the overlooked.
'to find the pieces of our history that might have slipped between the cracks.
'secrets kept in shadow, waiting for their moment in the sun.
'every road taken is an opportunity to explore.'
oh, man.
honestly, i cannot stop smiling.
this is secret britain.
this epic adventure begins in the far south west.
and the first leg will take us from cornwall right across to dover.
we're each taking different routes across the busiest parts of our small island, sidestepping the urban sprawl in search of true wilderness in the increasingly crowded south.
and we're starting here, in cornwall.
the setting for many a seaside holiday.
nearly five million of us head here every year.
and why not?
it's stunning.
it's easy to forget that what's now a pleasure playground used to be a working landscape.
the shells of tin mines echo a reminder of a not-so-distant past.
cornwall seems like an open book.
it's beauty on display for all to see.
but like the rest of the well-trodden south, there are still hidden corners waiting to be explored.
you just have to make the effort to find them.
and for that, i'm going to need a little help.
right, we're all kitted up.
am i at the front or the back?
yeah, if you sit in the front, i'll control from the back of the kayak.
just carry it into the water, to sort of knee-depth.
and then we'll...
looks a bit choppy, simon.
i think we'll be ok.
just keep it straight as we're kayaking out.
we'll try and time it between the waves.
simon carley-smith loves to paddle these waters.
he wants to show me that you can still get away from the crowds on one of the busiest coastlines in britain.
keep it steady.
right.
we're through.
'this is the pentire headland, 'on the north cornish coast.
'to the west lies padstow and the packed surfing beaches of newquay.'
'but down here, we're on our own.'
this is delightful.
i can't believe how crystal clear the water is.
i know.
it doesn't get better than this.
it really doesn't.
you'd never suspect that we were so close to polzeath.
obviously, you could walk the coastal path along here.
the coast path does run along the edge.
yeah, but to get down in a canoe, in a kayak like this, and see it from this perspective...
yeah, it's a different world.
a different world.
'it's a world that's not always easy to get to, 'as i'm starting to find out.'
look at this swell now.
we're being battered by the atlantic wind.
and we're going through.
we're going through this gulley, next to seven souls rock.
has to be said, simon, there's a lot more space on this side.
yeah, i know, but there's a lot more excitement on the left.
oh, hey!
this is lovely stuff.
keep surfing the wave.
we are literally paddling up and down hill here.
we've got a bit of big something coming in behind us.
here comes the wave!
on the left-hand side.
really chunking it down on the left.
and we're through.
there's little low, and here comes another little one, to carry us clear.
ah, yes!
simon, that was brilliant.
you did really well there.
very well.
i have to say, i thought we were a bit mad, going for that, but...
it was nearly eight or nine souls then, i've got to say.
'this is a unique stretch of the cornish coastline, where the sea laps the shore.
'the closest most people get is the cliff path high above.'
'looming over us are the jagged rocky outcrops of pentire point and the rumps.'
'these brooding cliffs tell a story all their own, 'a story of ancient underwater volcanoes and shallow seas.
'the curious folds in the rock are known as pillow lava, 'formed hundreds of millions of years ago, when magma oozed up and cooled rapidly in the sea.
'tiny petrified gas bubbles are still trapped inside.'
'from the water, you feel like you can reach out and touch a truly ancient world.'
'these dark volcanic cliffs have plenty of secrets to share.'
we'll pop in and visit the lundy hole, which is a huge sea cave that the roof has collapsed and it's made a really exciting feature.
oh, wow!
just take the kayak right deep into the cave.
it gets shallow there so we can moor it up.
ah!
it's beautiful, isn't it?
this is something else.
you can only access this from the water?
from the water, yeah.
we'll just leave it.
this will just float around.
yeah.
it's not going to go anywhere.
all these boulders are the remains of the roof that collapsed goodness knows how long ago.
it does make you wonder how long that roof's got.
i think we'll be ok.
you reckon?
'myth and legend abound in cornwall, and lundy hole is no exception.
'it's said to have been formed by the devil while he was fleeing from a cornish saint.'
'you do have to be pretty determined to get here.'
the access here really is really difficult.
there's only a couple of beaches between polzeath and port isaac where you can actually enter the water without having an abseil rope.
so that's why we've got it to ourselves.
special.
yeah, very special.
very special.
right, let's keep exploring.
shall we head back out?
yeah.
we'll head round to a nice sandy beach now.
'while people jostle for space on cornwall's popular beaches, 'arriving by kayak means we get one all to ourselves.'
fantastic.
yeah.
and look at it.
seriously, not a soul in sight.
this place is so inaccessible, not even our camera crew can come down here and film us.
just us.
but shh, it's a secret!
you can't tell anyone.
absolutely.
there you go.
that's where it is, if you want to know.
x marks the spot.
secluded coves and caves aren't cornwall's only secrets.
time to leave the atlantic behind and head across to the altogether more gentle southern cornish coast.
mevagissey's sleepy suntrap of a harbour is picture-postcard cornwall.
but on the outskirts of nearby st austell, the landscape unexpectedly transforms into something almost alien... something with a strange beauty, all of its own.
this area has become a stunning wildlife haven.
and just look at this splash of lilac spotted across the crevices.
it's gorgeous.
these are known as the cornish alps.
in the '60s there would have been about 50 of these cone-shaped mountains scattered across the entire landscape, the remains of a once-thriving mining industry.
buried under this slice of cornwall is an especially fine layer of china clay.
for over 250 years, this clay has been mined for the manufacture of porcelain and paper.
at its height, nearly one million ton of clay a year were being produced.
it was a lucrative industry that radically remodelled the st austell skyline.
for every ton of clay there were five tons of spoil, spoil that piled into man-made mountains.
cycling through this lunar landscape, you get a sense of the sheer scale of the industry... an industry that still continues today.
but once the miners move on, nature is allowed to take over and the alps take on a life of their own.
made by man, reclaimed by mother nature.
an unexpected sort of wilderness.
the cornish alps are a great escape and a monument to a proud industrial past.
but i'm leaving st austell and its secrets behind.
i'm moving on, tracking the river fowey inland until we reach the forbidding majesty of bodmin moor.
the moor is famed for the bodmin beast, and the smugglers of jamaica inn.
but there's a forgotten corner which harbours a secret far older and more mysterious, the final chapter in the legendary story of king arthur.
it's a secret that's well worth a short detour on my trip across the south.
according to legend, hidden in the depths of this bottomless pool lies king arthur's famous sword, excalibur, guarded by the lady of the lake.
as arthur lay mortally wounded after the bottle of camlann, he ordered sir bedivere to chuck his sword into the water.
what's a knight to do?
reluctantly, he agreed to his king's last wish.
but before excalibur hit the water, a lady's hand rose up and grabbed it before disappearing again beneath the surface.
the sword remains hidden, protected by its guardian until such time as the country needs its help once more.
the so-called bottomless pool of dozmary has in fact dried out many times.
but just because nobody has yet found excalibur lying in the mud doesn't mean it isn't there.
many people come to cornwall drawn by the legend of king arthur, yet few ever make it to dozmary.
it's a precious piece of secret britain.
back on the atlantic coast is a far more celebrated landmark in arthur's story.
summer visitors flock to the dramatic ruins of tintagel, believing it to be the great king's birthplace.
but to find real secrets on this stunning stretch of coast, you have to look beyond the tourists, beyond the castle, and beyond the cliff path.
everyone has a special place, and one couple found theirs tucked off tintagel's beaten track.
louise and david osborne loved rocky valley so much that this is where they celebrated their wedding.
we came here about a year before the wedding and we were just walking the boscastle to tintagel coast path.
we decided to turn left and go through the forest, really.
we just sort of went up there and discovered the ruins and the maze and the whole of the valley.
it wasn't in any of the guidebooks.
it was something you just stumble across.
we got married not far down the road, then we came here, had a nice picnic, with pasties and cheap fizz.
then we took all our guests for a little walk through the valley to show them our favourite place.
rocky valley, to me, is number one spot in the whole wide world.
nothing ever would beat this.
this is just the most perfect place.
we'll definitely keep returning.
yes.
definitely.
as often as we can.
back on our journey to uncover the secrets of the south,
i'm heading ever eastwards.
i've crossed the border into devon and the landscape opens out before me.
in 1964, the novelist em forster complained, "there's no forest
or fell to escape to today, no cave to curl up, no deserted valley.
well, he'd clearly forgotten about the nearly 400 square miles of bleak wilderness that make up dartmoor national park.
the rugged, desolate beauty of the moor.
granite tors standing proud above rock-strewn grasslands.
it's both majestic and mysterious.
natural perfection, you might think.
but dartmoor has a hidden history.
around 6,000 years ago, most of this was in fact forest, part of the vast wild wood that stretched across britain from coast to coast.
like most of the south, dartmoor's open landscape has been almost entirely shaped by man.
apart, that is, from a few remote and secret spots high on the moor.
simon lee from natural england has agreed to take me into dartmoor's past.
we have well and truly left civilisation behind.
we have, yeah.
got a few sheep there.
apart from the occasional hiker, there's not a soul in sight.
not a soul in sight, no.
'we're heading for one of dartmoor's last remaining pockets of wild wood,
'black-a-tor copse.
'it's a steep climb up the okement valley to where the moor almost touches the sky.'
there isn't a lot of woodland here now, is there?
no!
a lot of that was cleared by bronze age people.
and if you scramble up the slope, you might get a glimpse of it.
ok.
black-a-tor copse?
looking splendid in the mist.
doesn't it just?
'forests like this once covered britain.
'as people settled and began to farm, 'they cleared the trees and enclosed the land.
'black-a-tor copse is a moment frozen in time.
'a world of oak trees long-since forgotten.'
this is absolutely incredible.
what a spot!
it's so different to what is just a couple of steps behind, and you walk into all of this.
it looks so cosy and comfy.
there's rock-hard granite down here but because it's covered in all these mosses and lichen, it's like a big quilt.
you just kind of want to dive into it all.
how old are these kind of twisted oaks, then?
there's documented evidence that there have been trees here for several centuries.
but the individual trees themselves, probably no more than about 200 years old.
are they stunted simply because they can't get the root system down into this granite?
no, i think the main reason they're stunted is because of the weather conditions up here.
it's so high - we're up about 1,300ft here, so it's cold and it's wet.
yeah.
and it's simply that they can't grow any faster or any bigger.
'this is one of only three high-altitude woodlands left on dartmoor.
all are protected.
'the unique conditions make it feel almost tropical.
'not rainforest, but cloudforest.'
it's just loaded with mosses and lichen and ferns.
it is.
in terms of what you're seeing at the moment, it's a woodland that's as near natural as you can get in the uk.
'walking through these gnarled oaks 'feels like walking into a primeval indigenous landscape, 'a secret of britain's past.'
ever since i was a little lad, i have always, always loved oak trees.
i don't know what it's about them.
i think they're just...
they're so homely and so protective and ever since i've had the chance to come in here,
i've seen yet another side to their character.
the way that they've...
well, look at this.
they've twisted and bent themselves around this boulderous and boggy landscape of dartmoor.
and trudging across that misty, bleak moor to get here, on arrival it just feels so warm and so welcoming.
and to think really that this landscape hasn't changed at all since the last ice age, it is really, really rare.
this is a very special spot.
'two and a half million people visit dartmoor every year.
'but few venture as far as black-a-tor copse 'and even fewer realise that there's a greater secret locked in the heart of the moor... 'one that played a part in building some of britain's proudest monuments.
'the local name for granite is moonstone, 'and it's been used here for thousands of years.
'but just 200 years ago, dartmoor granite became the stone of choice 'for the architects of many of london's finest buildings.'
'i'm going to explore dartmoor's forgotten link with our national heritage.'
'my search begins close to one of its most famous landmarks...
'haytor, an imposing slab of granite.'
'i'm following something i never imagined you'd find on dartmoor.'
a junction here.
'a railway.
'made of stone.'
so...
that must be hound tor up there.
'it's the start of an extraordinary transportation network 'that carried granite from moorland quarries down to the sea 'and on to the heart of london.'
'as the weather takes a turn for the worst, the tramway leads me to local archaeologist jane marchand.'
jane, how you doing?
all right?
i'm fine, matt, thanks.
what have you done to the weather?
i apologise, but this is real dartmoor weather.
isn't it just.
it's lovely.
i've had a lovely walk down this tramway.
have you?
yeah, following these little granite rails.
is this the quarry down here on the left?
this is holwell quarry, down here.
the working here was really a very short period of time, probably about 30, 40 years.
but you can see the amount of granite that's been extracted.
and the effort that must have gone into it.
we've lost the whole of that granite face.
we know that the granite from holwell quarry went to the british museum.
formed the british library.
and there's some in buckingham palace, apparently.
it was seen to be the best granite in the country, if not in the world.
and did they blast it, then, with gunpowder?
they did, they did, yeah.
and you've got evidence, where the...
that's actually where they'd have put the stick of gunpowder in.
yeah, yeah.
oh, this is rather nice, matt.
it's a nice little secret building, really, that most people don't know is here.
it's what we call a beehive shelter.
and this is where, once they put the gunpowder in, they'd have all run for cover to.
right.
to get away from the effects of the blast.
if you want to go in...
can i go in, yes?
yeah.
i have got a little torch with me.
always prepared.
here we go.
it's cosy, that's for sure.
and beautifully built, actually.
if you look at the great blocks of granite that they've used.
yeah.
it actually gives them some protection from the weather as well.
it's probably quite a welcome place to have.
it does feel very protected.
it does, doesn't it?
especially with these...
massive great slabs, yeah.
once the granite was quarried, one-ton blocks were loaded on to wagons, which were pulled along the tramway by teams of horses.
i'm following the granite's route off the moor all the way to the stover canal, and the second leg of its long journey to london via the port at teignmouth.
the canal was a vital link for both the quarry and the nearby china clay mines, but as demand dwindled, it saw its last barge past through in 1939.
over the years, evidence of this once-thriving industry has gradually disappeared.
right, well, i'm now in the village of teigngrace and i'm trying to find the start of the stover canal, which i think is down here in this housing estate.
it feels so wrong.
i'm going to walk into somebody's garden in a minute.
but, er...
oh, no, hang on a minute.
this is it.
good, good.
i've got a railway line which is running through here.
and i think i need to cross this railway line.
let's have a look.
how does this work?
one of them slidey ones.
check there's no trains coming.
no.
no, judging by the look of that, i don't think this railway line has been used for a while.
through this little gate and it should just be up ahead.
this must be the bridge.
this is it.
i found it!
yes.
yeah, this is it.
this is it.
i think just up by that greenhouse is where the trackway would have ended.
all the granite would have been taken off down to teignmouth.
incredible to think there'd be 50ft barges here, full of 35 tons of granite.
yeah.
so teignmouth must be that way.
incredible.
'wandering along the overgrown banks of this tranquil stretch of water, 'history hangs in the air all around.
'this is haytor's secret.
'a past that should be remembered.'
'the men who worked and transported dartmoor granite 'were true industrial pioneers, 'who helped create some of the nation's most magnificent buildings.'
'scratch the surface of this great country 'and you'll find stories like haytor everywhere.'
'as we travel across the south 'on this leg of our search for secret britain, 'we're looking for to reclaim the hidden and the forgotten, 'the cracks in our crowded modern world.
'incredible stories of things we might otherwise overlook.'
'travelling east along dorset's jurassic coast,
'i've reached the cliffs above bridport.'
i'm now at 626 feet above sea level.
this is the highest point on the south coast, golden cap.
and stretched out all below, delicious dorset, as far as the eye can see.
'but i'm bypassing its pretty villages with their quaint cottages, 'as i head into a hidden network of ancient tracks 'that run unnoticed between our modern roads.'
'these are the hollow-ways, from the anglo-saxon for "sunken road".'
'at first glance, they might seem like simple footpaths, 'but look closer and they tell a story of our long-forgotten past.'
'to guide me on my journey into this dappled green world 'is landscape historian valerie belsey.'
the canopy here is so dense and it makes the lane very atmospheric, doesn't it?
it does, because remember it started off at the top of the field, and then it's been eroded.
and it was used by cattle in the beginning.
and the dung from the cattle has been thrown back up and that acts as fertiliser so the trees on the top have grown even taller.
that's why it's so lush.
that's right, yeah.
this has been a busy pathway throughout the centuries.
the tree-shrouded holloways are unique to the soft stone counties of southern england.
drovers would have used them as a route to market - generations of travellers carving out a well-worn path hidden in a hedgerow.
this holloway is trodden so deep into the yellow dorset sandstone that it's become known as hell lane.
is the depth of this particular lane an indicator of how old it is?
because the sides are very steep.
it's not a given clue.
there are other clues.
'to date a holloway, you have to piece together nature's clues.
'part of that means counting the number of species that grow along its banks.'
this is part of hooper and pollard's hedge-dating theory.
each hardwood species for a 30-yard stretch of any lane on one side is representative of 100 years.
so we've got holly, which is the first of the species.
the next one up is hazel, so that's two.
which is just here.
that's that one there with the lovely light going through the leaves.
so we're up to 200 years. 200 years.
ash here.
and we've got an ash, which is three.
and then going up the ash is a briar, now that counts, so that's four.
and then if you look a little bit further along we've got the maple leaf tree which is a sycamore, which gives us 500 years.
so in this short stretch, we've bagged 500 years?
500 years, yes.
five centuries of history locked into a handful of english trees.
leaving valerie behind, i follow hell lane even deeper into dorset.
given its name, this particular holloway has a surprising destination.
hell lane turns into a pilgrims' path leading to an ancient church.
it's certainly well-weathered stone.
nestling in a corner of the church is the unique shrine to a saint from saxon times said to have the power of healing.
there are two interesting things about this shrine.
first of all, this is the only parish church in england to hold the bones of a saint, and secondly,
st wite was a woman.
'even today, people bring their petitions to the good st wite.'
my journey through the holloways of dorset has been a revelation.
from above, they snake like green rivers through the countryside.
from below, they're a dappled doorway into another world, extraordinary, everyday places... just waiting to be discovered.
beyond dorset, i'm heading deeper into the heart of the south, into the open, rolling countryside of salisbury plain.
here stands stonehenge, britain's world-famous ancient monument... mysterious, rather than secret.
not so the vast expanse of the plain, which is under the control of the mod.
out there are thousands of other monuments, an ancient landscape rarely seen.
not many civvies get to experience what i'm off to see, because we've been given special access to some of the 94,000 acres controlled by the british army, and i am assured that if i do as i'm told,
everything should be perfectly safe.
salisbury plain is the largest military training ground in britain.
roughly the size of the isle of wight, it's big enough for a full-scale battle.
not the kind of place for a sunday stroll, you might think.
but even though much of the area remains out of bounds, the surprising thing about salisbury plain is that not all of it is off-limits.
you have to take the signs seriously, but if you can get here it offers a unique window onto britain's history.
that's because, despite the ongoing warfare, its many archaeological sites are largely undisturbed.
mod archaeologist richard osgood has uncovered some of the secrets of this plain, including its ancient military past.
you're standing on an iron age hill fort.
this is about 300 bc, it's the biggest we have here, about 10 hectares.
this hill we're on?
this is a rampart of a hill fort.
it's a big impressive monument, expressing the powers of those that constructed it.
but it's not on its own, because as you look out here there are other features all connected with this.
the word we use is "palimpsest", layer upon layer of archaeology, and the military being here has protected it.
the mod first bought this land over 100 years ago, and their ownership has saved its rolling chalk grasslands from being developed or intensively farmed.
it's what makes salisbury plain probably the greatest open-air museum in britain.
can you see those lines, those sort of terraces?
the steps on the left?
yeah, those are field terraces from the medieval period.
there's a corresponding set on the other side.
but if you follow those up, there's a clump of trees right at the top, and they're sitting on a bronze age burial mound.
are they?
it's a round barrow, about 2,000 bc.
we're going to go and look at some iron age stuff, let's go and see what we've got.
super, sounds good.
chisenbury midden is one of the richest sites on all salisbury plain.
to protect the remains here, digging is strictly forbidden, but the local badgers don't seem to understand the rules.
so they must be turning up all sorts of stuff then, these badgers.
they do, they're incredibly powerful bits of machinery in many ways.
they're great at digging stuff.
you can see that this big mound of spoil is coming out from the set.
there's something in here.
have you got something there?
is that something?
yeah, congratulations.
i've been on excavations that have found less pottery than that.
is that honestly something?
it was literally just lying there!
that is a large shard of an early iron age pot.
you're kidding me!
no, and look at the size of it.
is that early iron age?
yeah.
actually, can you see there?
it's actually got some decorations from fingernails running along the edge.
never in this world...
yeah.
it's an early iron age shard which has been decorated.
it was honestly just lying there, you would think i was meant to pick it up...
no, that's right, not placed at all!
that is extraordinary.
that is a big piece as well, isn't it?
so what do you think that would have been?
it's a big cooking vessel.
you can see the circumference pretty much from the rim that that you've got.
it's going round like that.
yeah, absolutely.
those sharp-clawed archaeologists certainly know what they're doing.
i'm just thinking, you know, the amount of history that is buried in that mound is absolutely mind-blowing.
and this view here, this chalky grassland, it has hardly changed since neolithic times.
this place really is like a landscape time-capsule.
and thanks to those badgers, they've just prised it open and given us a little glimpse.
the chalk that shapes this landscape underpins much of southern england... a great white way leading to the coast.
it's time for me to leave the untamed beauty of salisbury plain behind.
moving east, the chalk rises up into the rolling south downs.
latter-day travelling players ed and will believe every landscape has a story to tell, a story that needs to be kept alive, both in word and song.
we've been walking these ancient pathways for years.
the south downs are really our local mountain range.
you're on top of the world.
it may be a small, english world, but you're on top of it.
it's a way of life that's really let us learn a lot about the old traditions and the history.
i wonder if we could sing you a quick song, would that be possible?
it won't take a minute of your time.
♪ my son john was tall and slim
both: ♪ and he had a leg for every limb... ♪
'the songs are a powerful passport.'
they don't weigh anything, they don't cost anything, they introduce you to people...
what we try and do is to take these songs and give them out where they're unexpected.
'just on the side of the street, whenever you meet anyone.'
♪ oh, it's the farmer's daughter, dear
♪ she brews aplenty of strong beer
♪ and she's enough to cheer up any soul... ♪
'and the reactions are amazing.'
people don't know that this whole realm of song and folklore exists.
applause
thank you.
♪ time passes over... ♪
one of the songs we learnt on the south downs was called sorrows away.
both: ♪ since we've learned a new act to drive sorrows away
♪ sorrows away
♪ sorrows away, oh... ♪
we're just doing the same things everyone has always done, just being part of the landscape here, just like our great ancestors were.
and it's really important that people realise that there are these things, these songs, stories, ways of life that we have and that we have inherited from our ancestors, and we must not forget that.
♪ well, i may not be rich and i may not be poor
♪ but i'm as happy as those that have thousands or more. ♪
i'm also exploring the south downs in search, not of history or tradition, but for something that feels strangely exotic in this corner of quintessentially english countryside.
i have joined a hunt for one of the most elusive and sought after plants in nature, the orchid.
but if we find what we're hoping to find, there's no way i can tell you where we are.
because these precious flowers attract thieves, obsessive collectors who dig up and steal their specimens as soon as they surface.
and with a worldwide black-market in orchids estimated at £6 billion, it's no wonder my guides, graham from the national trust and orchid expert david lang, want me to keep our precise location to myself.
so, david, what exactly are we looking for?
we're looking for fragrant orchids here.
you're looking for an orchid about that tall, sort of pinky-purple, with a slender spike.
so watch where we put our feet?
watch where you put your feet, please.
what about this?
that's a common spotted orchid.
so that's one?
as the name implies, it's actually very common, and if you look closely, it's got spotted leaves.
they look like little tiger stripes on there.
not to be confused with the early purple orchid, which has similar leaves, but much deeper purple flowers.
what have you got for me, david?
i've found you a nice patch of fragrant orchids.
oh, lovely!
if you look at this lot, and you get down low and look up there.
oh, isn't that gorgeous?
it's absolutely superb.
you can come up here safely.
have a sniff of that one.
oh, yes, very delicate.
a very delicate smell.
beautiful to look at from down here as well.
you've got a lovely vista of them here.
it's a gorgeous sight.
this is the best area for them.
the flowers have got a little three-lobed lip and a very long spur which is full of nectar, and that attracts mainly skipper butterflies and small flies.
david leads us down to a secluded hollow where he sets us hunting for an even rarer orchid.
what are we looking for, apart from nettles and thistles?
we're looking for fly orchids here.
and i can see some just up here.
can you see them?
here we are.
you see?
right.
now, the wasp that pollinates these thinks this is another wasp.
the male wasps come to copulate or mate with the flower, and in so doing they get pollen dusted on their heads.
it's no coincidence, then, that the flower actually resembles a wasp.
it does look exactly like a little wasp which is perched with its wings folded, and of course it secretes these pheromones which attract the male wasp who thinks it's a female.
the males come on the wing about a fortnight before the females, so they're coming and pollinating the orchids, and then a fortnight later the ladies appear and they realise the error of their ways and chase the ladies and leave the flowers alone.
very sneaky!
very sneaky, very clever.
so in essence, the orchid is seducing the male wasp?
absolutely.
completely falsely, leading it on?
yes, yes, absolutely.
brilliant.
it works extremely well.
orchids are as shy as anyone else when it comes to reproduction, and few people have actually witnessed the way in which they woo their wasps.
but suddenly, right in front of us...
we've got it happening.
what we have actually got here is the wasp in action.
it's happening.
yes, yes.
how often have you seen this, david?
never.
never?
you've never seen this before?
nope.
so this is a first for you?
the first time i've seen it actually happening in front of me.
in how many years?
since 1947.
that's incredible!
how lucky are we to be here right now?
people do see it but i've never been lucky enough to see it before.
and get a photograph of it.
and get it on film.
yes, it can't be bad, can it?
dear, oh dear.
what a bit of luck.
you look quite overcome!
i'm very pleased.
very pleased indeed.
hidden away from the thieves and hunters,
i hope these fascinating flowers will be left to procreate in peace.
my journey is now taking me east to join matt in dover.
but i can't leave the downs behind without a quick detour in search of another secret, one once hidden in shadow, now glorying in the sun.
novelist virginia woolf is perhaps as well known for her life as for her work.
a member of the bloomsbury group, a collection of writers, thinkers and artists, she and her friends sought refuge here in the downs from the conventions of london society and the ravages of the great war.
these days, the haunts of virginia and her friends are meccas for literary fans, but at the beginning of the 20th century, a place like charleston house was her safe haven.
charleston now opens its doors to the public, a testament to the artists who made their lives here.
what was once a sanctuary, a private secret, is now shared.
but the sense of true escape remains.
your imagination just runs wild.
who could fail to get lost in a place like this?
absolute bliss.
i'm heading east towards dover, the last stop on this leg of our journey across secret britain.
but there's just time for one final detour.
this is dungeness, a bleak, remote wilderness clinging to the very edge of our island.
few other places can boast both a steam railway and a nuclear power plant.
arriving here feels like stepping through the looking glass.
this is the largest pebble beach in europe.
and it's on the move, expanding out into the channel at a rate of up to eight and a half feet a year.
dilapidated sheds and decaying boats dot the landscape, abandoned in a world of constantly shifting shingle.
this arid place is the closest thing we have in britain to a desert.
it rains as little here as it does on the rock of gibraltar.
ecologist owen leyshon is my guide to its harsh beauty.
so, owen, it's an extraordinary landscape.
it's very tough for any plants and humans to survive on dungeness.
cold in the winter, really hot and dry in the summer.
it's, then, as close an environment as you can get to a desert.
yes.
so there's no soil or anything.
how deep is this single?
it's about 17 to 20 metres deep, the shingle.
if it's that deep then the plants are certainly determined, their roots searching the shingle for every nutrient, every drop of salt-free moisture.
there seem to be a lot of these white-flowered plants here, owen.
what have we got here?
what are these?
this is sea kale.
nice, good old tough seaside plant, nice juicy leaves to it with a lovely big white pom-pom display of flowers on it.
characteristic seaside plant, but on dungeness you could probably say the biggest collection of sea kale in this country.
look closer and more than one third of all the plant species in the uk managed to grow amongst these pebbles.
but there aren't the only form of life here.
further inland, fresh water collects in craters left by gravel extraction, and in the freshwater lives something that was once declared extinct in britain.
oh, my word!
they're leeches.
these are medicinal leeches.
in europe, dungeness is one of the best places for the species.
this is come from a gravel pit, so the water quality is excellent.
lots of food for them, frogs and birds for them to feed on, because they need blood.
and you need a special license...
you need a license to handle these because they're quite rare in this country.
what do you have to do - just keep them moving?
i've got to keep holding these a bit like a hot potato.
there we go, let's get this one out.
i've just got to keep moving him around because he's going to be looking for a place to bite me.
and which end is the teeth?
300 teeth on it, and they expand about two or three times their size when they've had their meal.
that will be it for the rest of the season.
this is the largest leech in this country.
you're not going to mistake this for anything else.
leeches have long been used in medicine, and in the 19th century their popularity reached its peak.
over-harvesting lead to dramatic shortages, but here in this corner of kent, the leech somehow hung on.
it all adds to the atmosphere... an alien, storybook world, lost somewhere in time.
coming as i have from the heart of england's green and pleasant land,
dungeness is a startling sight.
it's strangely alluring, it's dreamlike, it's almost in slow motion, this place.
totally unexpected but unforgettable.
beyond dungeness, the flatlands of shingle give way to the towering chalk skyscrapers of the kent coast.
it's one of our island's most iconic landscapes, and it's our last stop on this journey across the crowded south.
the white cliffs of dover, an awe-inspiring sight, and for generations a symbol of hope and freedom.
but let's leave vera lynn behind for one moment and explore their hidden secrets.
the cliffs stand guard at the narrowest point of the english channel and have long been a key stronghold in the defence of britain's coastline.
dover wears most of its military history on its sleeve.
its proud castle and wartime tunnels now welcome visitors with open arms.
but what i'm looking for lies down a steep zig-zag path cut directly into the chalk.
this rather precipitous route leads to langdon bay, and a well-hidden ghost of dover's military past.
from above you'd never know it was here.
there were searchlights set back in these tunnels, and they would check out every ship that was coming into the harbour or close to the harbour, and if they didn't like the look of them they would send a signal, and then...
boom.
imagine being posted here on a harsh winter's night during a german bombing raid - the sea outside battering against the cliffs, the cold, the noise.
this really was frontline britain.
but dover's harbour wasn't only vulnerable in wartime.
langdon bay has another secret, one only revealed at low tide and by a steep scramble down a ladder.
on this beach below kent's great white walls of chalk lies the twisted and torn skeleton of the steamship falcon.
it looks like the ribcage of some massive prehistoric beast that's been left behind on the beach.
look how it's been corroded and shaped by the sea.
limpets attach themselves to it.
it's quite beautiful.
it's not a casualty of war.
the ss falcon posed a different kind of danger to dover.
an elderly steamship, which had seen better days, the falcon said sale in october 1926, heavily laden with the cargo of jute and matches.
she lies almost forgotten now, but in her day, the
falcon was one of the biggest news stories in britain.
just off dover, her unfortunate combination of cargo caught fire and the crew were forced to abandon ship.
this rare footage shows the fire consuming her from within.
the captain tried desperately to save his ship but eyewitnesses watched in horror as the falcon began to drift towards the harbour, putting dover at risk of a major blaze.
with moments to spare, the wind changed and good fortune blew her clear, only to come to grief on the rocky shore of langdon bay.
now the falcon's iron hull is all that remains.
a secret echo of a forgotten past.
it seems a fitting place to end the first leg of our adventure.
dover's white cliffs stand in complete contrast to the volcanic majesty of the north cornish coast where we started.
it's a reminder of just how different secret britain can be.
between the cracks of our crowded modern country we have found a far more ancient land.
yes, there are wild and undiscovered corners, from the untamed vastness of salisbury plain to the hollow ways and green lanes that weave their way through our countryside.
and from the alien landscapes of dungeness to the cornish alps.
every road taken can lead to a discovery, a forgotten piece of the story of britain.
but this is just the start of our exciting journey.
there's a lot more secret britain just waiting to be explored.
next time we're moving north to travel through the hidden heart of britain.
where have you brought me?
it's an epic journey that will take us all the way from the flatlands of the east to the staggering sea cliffs of pembrokeshire.
oh, my word!
i'm heading into a flooded water world in search of a very secret island...
you just cannot see it at all.
while i'm discovering snowdon's ancient botanical secrets.
so this is it.
she laughs
subtitles by red bee media ltd
e-mail subtitling@bbc.co.uk
__file_terminal__
good luck hunting
is anyone home?
hello?
is anyone there?
yes!
i'm coming.
they are people from australia.
i think they are.
did i wake you up?
never mind.
we have reservation.
alen higins.
marko, welcome.
my hunting license.
how long will you stay?
for three days.
this is my wife.
good morning.
you're speaking our language?
i do.
can we come in?
of course.
this is my wife.
mara, show them their room.
follow me, please.
please.
i suggest you want to rest.
no, i'll go change for hunting right away.
good morning, uncle.
it will be good.
german?
he's from australia.
he speaks german.
what's his name?
i didn't remember.
you better start remembering.
you're starting again.
why?
didn't i say he'll come back?
how many times have you said that?
i'm not wrong this time, nephew.
be careful, they're foreigners.
they get offended for nothing.
i don't want to lose job.
and your father lost his life.
he didn't want that either.
when will you quit that already?
isn't 20 years of waiting enough for you?
20 years...
it was full last night.
i won't be able to walk straight.
you could restrain, at least until they leave.
they brought their luggage in.
they have it so many!
where is aunt mara?
she's tidying room.
did you hear uncle marko?
madam talks like us.
really?
you didn't tell me.
why did you come?
uncle promise he'll make me a doll.
little later.
alright, but is it sure?
yes.
go now, it's not playtime now.
and prepare food for the dogs.
i will, uncle marko.
wait!
that's him, i'm telling you, it's him!
every hunter who speaks german is 'him' for you.
everyone is sniper for you.
remember, everyone must go trough sieve like grains.
do you understand?
think about it.
i can't remember how he looked like.
so he's australian.
good luck hunting!
alen, give me the keys please.
be careful that someone doesn't steal it.
don't worry, love, i will be.
you should've marry your gun!
you're not jealous, are you?
i prefer to have a woman as my rival.
under condition for me to get along with your rival.
with a handsome driver, for example.
stop it!
you promised you'll never mention him again.
promised, promised!
how many times did you promise to leave me?
i will do it one day.
you can go right away.
you're free to go.
like this bird right here.
please?
yes?
take this bird outside.
but it sings very nice.
my husband doesn't like birds.
i'll prepare hot water for you.
thank you.
i told you not to speak in that language in my presence.
i didn't say anything important.
still, speak so i can understand you, alright?
you don't trust me.
i trust no one.
yes, my dear.
i trust no one.
it's pretty.
i could export them.
all children love toys.
yours too?
i don't have children.
why?
don't disturb the madam.
we don't have storks in the mountain either.
please, water is hot.
thank you.
madam.
australia...
australia is far away.
it just seem so.
for me that fence is far away too.
an accident?
let's call it like that.
i had a collision with german shrapnel.
i heard that war was very very unpleasant.
unpleasant.
i didn't say it right?
on contrary.
my father fought against japanese.
really, so we're some kind of allies.
we have to drink to that.
do you want to try our schnapps?
gladly.
mara, what are you waiting for?
but marko said...
that doesn't apply on guests.
bottle is there, fill it to the top.
who taught you our language?
my mother.
what's your husband's occupation?
fur and pelt trader.
an australian?
yes.
and he speaks german.
he's german by origin.
cheers!
it's strong!
only at the start.
lady will get drunk!
don't worry, she has our blood in her veins!
am i right.
yes.
another glass.
isn't that too much?
madam has to go hunting.
i'm not going hunting.
you're tired?
i don't like hunting.
he can go without me.
is it good?
what are you doing?
alright, i'll pay for it.
what do you want to hunt?
bucks?
bucks, very good.
we'll leave in ten minutes.
keti, get ready, we're leaving.
it's him.
what did you and marko talk about this morning?
i don't know.
he told me not to drink.
you didn't talk about the guest?
about australian?
no.
what would we talk about him?
i'm sensing you're preparing something.
don't interfere with that!
don't count on my help.
i didn't ask for it!
not marko, you have to beat me.
hello, keti!
come here!
i'd like to leave here.
really?
with whom?
even with you.
with me?
you live with me.
you just live next to me.
should i shoot?
no, it's too young.
we're alone.
he left.
do you know why did i take you with me?
hold on.
alen?
yes?
come here.
why did you take me with you?
so we can celebrate our wedding anniversary alone while hunting.
alen, you remembered?
that's a good buck.
shoot.
shoot!
again!
that is another one.
another?
why?
check.
no, that's not another.
feel free to check.
bravo, it's here!
good luck hunting.
you too.
please give me my bag.
here you go.
we're inviting you to lunch.
thank you.
marko, be our guest.
thank you, i have to go back.
we'd like to be alone for a while.
good.
thank you.
shall we go to some other place?
the whole forest is ours.
what will that be?
scary scarecrow!
when will you carve me?
when you grow up.
when i grow up i won't be a teacher.
what will you be then?
i'll be a foreigner, like that lady.
clever little thing.
they shot it!
uncle marko, what did you catch?
where are your guests.
they stayed.
alone?
they don't need me.
besa, take the horse away.
did he aim for the head?
i have to skin him.
maybe he hit him by accident.
maybe.
did they fight?
he looked at her like they got married yesterday.
what did they look like?
like us when we make up.
we didn't make up for a long time.
because we don't know how to fight.
good afternoon, uncle.
the head.
it was by accident.
he's shooting venison in the head.
i never heard of that.
hunter always shoots in shoulder blade.
he was aiming for shoulder blade.
and shot him in the head.
so he's not a good shooter.
he's not crazy to aim for the head.
he was scared to ruin his trophy.
he almost got away.
so when he shot buck was on the run.
why is that important?
don't you remember?
he was always killing while victim was on the run.
where is he?
he went to look around.
to visit a place where he had the most successful hunt in his life.
five heads, five shots if i'm not mistaken.
does he remind you of someone?
on higins.
i want to know does it look like a sniper.
they're all the same under the helmet.
no one looked so much like him.
not just by exterior, but by his actions.
what do you know about his actions?
something i know, something i guess.
i believe my eyes more than your guesses.
you should've seen him today before the hunt.
and during the hunt?
he was completely different man before the hunt.
man?
him?
i'm not talking about him, i'm talking about higins.
go and see have they eaten their dinner.
wait.
take besa with you.
besa, come here.
why are you sending her away.
she doesn't have to hear everything.
you have no right to insult her.
it's better to hate me than you.
whatever happens it'll be easier for her to curse me.
nothing will happen while i'm here.
remember!
don't forget, i'm here too!
he asked you to come.
take their passports.
what should i do with them?
maybe there's something interesting there.
it's cleaned up really good.
take this.
thank you, i don't smoke.
maybe you want a glass of wine?
i could go for that.
cheers.
what is that mean?
it says 'long live'.
it's not bad.
marko, when are we waking up?
at 5, is that alright?
sure.
good night.
how do you like my wife?
you have to admit she's lovely.
every man's dream, isn't it?
if you like her, that's no problem.
give her some more wine.
you want another glass of wine?
that was a joke of course.
don't imagine anything.
do you understand?
yes, i understand.
i hope so.
good night.
do you need anything else?
your passport please.
here you go.
higins australian?
that's nonsense.
that's all on the paper.
you can write down everything you want.
he's german by origin.
you can't see in the passport what was he doing during the war.
i'm going to the village tomorrow.
what?
you want to give him life?
he'll get what he deserves.
a few years in jail, he'll get that.
if he's guilty justice will be done.
justice!
do you know what is justice?
here, it's this.
do you understand?
like a tree, when it gets old it's becoming hard, full of knots!
it's different while blood is still hot.
justice is burning then!
but when the blood gets cold, justice gets cold too.
but we still can't...
and he could've kill?
he was killing for a bet!
he valued my father's life for two stinky cigarettes, and you want to forgive him.
did i say i'll forgive him?
i can't even kill him.
if someone owes you, collect the whole debt.
if you can't, forgive him everything.
you can't take half, and forgive the rest, do you understand?
one or another.
higins will pay with his life, or you will let him leave.
you should decide as soon as possible.
you have only tomorrow.
i released the dogs.
it's alright.
they won't go outside the yard.
why are they on chains then?
they're obedient.
when are you leaving?
day after tomorrow.
maybe you could go sooner.
i don't know, maybe.
you should've worn a sweater, it's cold outside.
where did you fight in war?
what kind of question is that?
you never told me about it.
you never asked me.
so, where did you fight?
in war!
where?
on what side were you?
on the right one, keti!
on the winners side?
that's right, on the winners side!
winners are those who survive the war.
and the others who died?
they are the beaten ones.
they're the dead, so the winners like me can live.
many of them didn't have to die.
they had to, keti.
it was war time.
are you sorry because it's over?
sometimes yes.
cheers!
they were fighting again.
i don't know.
i saw her when she stepped outside.
marko?
when that happened?
who else was there?
who survived with you?
sir janko.
he saw everything?
why do you ask?
well...
i'm just asking.
i won't allow that anyone interferes with that!
do you hear?
no one!
sir janko would've recognized him.
he'll be back in a day or two and tell us.
then he'll run and report him.
if he's guilty he should be on trial.
that is my debt.
i will be his judge.
the whole debt should be collected, or to forgive everything.
and what if he finds out that you suspect?
from whom?
i don't know...
he might notice.
you don't think about me.
nothing will happen to you.
you'll leave me alone.
let's leave this house.
we'll go away.
together?
yes.
alen?
alen!
yes?
i have to tell you something.
what is it?
game warden and the old man.
game warden and old man?
what old man?
why did you do that?
that was a joke.
i didn't mean about the thing tonight, i'm used to that.
but today in hunt, and by the fall, why were you so nice to me?
what do you mean?
don't you remember at all?
you woke me up just to ask me that?
i'm sorry.
speak,
you started talking about game warden.
what happened with him?
nothing.
nothing important.
i should apologize to you for last night.
it wasn't your fault.
it was, because i'm allowing that.
is he always like that?
i believed that he'll change.
what about now?
i don't know.
that's not the way to kill a fish.
take her out.
we have to go.
alright.
i'll stay and prepare lunch.
madam, my suggestion for lunch.
alen!
be careful.
of what?
wild boar?
i'm going to get groceries.
come here.
if marko needed sir janko he'd go to find him himself.
who's says i'm going to see sir janko?
do your job!
you should clean buck's head.
you can't stop me from going.
don't be sorry later.
it's better that i'm the only one who's sorry.
go to see sir janko and tell him that his acquaintance from the war is here.
hunter from the war.
hunter from the war, alright.
do you want to know?
marko took my advice.
he's taking higins to his old hunting ground, on the place where he commit crime.
good luck hunting to him!
is there any wild boars nearby?
no.
that must be some special place.
you will see.
are we finally here?
how do you know?
i'm just asking.
and?
where are those wild boars?
go in that direction.
i'll stay here.
maybe they'll come from this side.
stop!
what happened?
come back here.
we have to go to some other place.
why?
there's no boars here.
listen to me marko, what's happening with you?
you said before...
now i say there isn't any!
come.
come to me.
come here.
did you come to help me.
i'm going to the village.
come on, sit down.
i'm in a hurry.
sit down.
i have to get sir janko.
he has to see his acquaintance.
what acquaintance?
hunter from the war.
from the war?
what is this?
aunt, what is this?
do you like it?
you're a working girl.
you surely know how to cook.
not everything.
i can't cook at all.
will you teach me?
i'm in a hurry.
i will never shoot in your company.
take it easy, we'll get something.
finally!
why didn't you wait for my signal?
is something wrong?
this is a wild boar, with piglets!
you don't kill one of those.
you're talking nonsense!
you never miss?
never.
you never missed anyone?
no if he was on my gunpoint.
what's the meaning of these scars?
they are my hunting trophies.
these are antelopes, leopards, this is a crocodile, and this is our boar.
why aren't you carving that to gun-stock?
i wouldn't have enough room.
in the war, did the snipers carve their shots to gun-stock?
you're mentioning war very often here.
did you already forget it?
of course not.
it was long time ago.
it's still not over for the two of us.
marko, is there any chamois there?
yes.
are we going up there?
yes, tomorrow.
how do you like the flowers?
i like it.
where were you for so long?
maybe marko can explain that better.
did you get something?
barely.
i've made excellent lunch, you will be surprised?
is that so?
you're in a bad mood.
did you miss?
miss?
nonsense.
i'm angry at marko.
he's acting strange.
yes, he is strange.
he's strange with you too?
are you jealous maybe?
do i look jealous?
look here, we have a guest.
who's kid is this?
she's an orphan.
marko adopted her.
come.
come, come to say hello.
aren't i a craftsman?
it looks like her.
she's a smart woman.
it seems so.
but still, she fell in the trap.
what's wrong about her.
she's guilty.
she loves him.
higins?
you're still not sure who is he.
i'm not completely sure what's he like.
who is faster?
where is sir janko?
where were you?
i wasn't there.
how could you, you brat!
don't beat the child, she was with me.
come, besa.
why did you hit her?
she's drifting.
child should play.
don't take out your rage on her.
you don't understand.
get inside.
we're sleeping in the log cabin tonight?
alright.
is it good?
it's damaged.
you would be better butcher than game warden.
you can keep the trophy if you want!
yes, that's a nice work.
is that your trophy?
this is keti!
are you selling that?
is this enough?
i won't give you more than that.
who ordered this?
did you order that?
no.
that would be a dangerous joke.
one moment.
do you know him?
it's my father.
yes, he looks like you.
he was killed in the war.
then he wasn't killed, he's fallen.
there are no killers in the war, understand?
he was killed in wicked way.
why?
german soldier killed him.
if that was german soldier, it wasn't without a reason.
look what that uncle gave me.
look, uncle marko.
uncle!
what will you hunt tomorrow?
chamois.
and that's the end.
of what?
of our adventure.
i don't believe you anymore.
how long will we spin in circles?
all those journeys are just a futile getaway.
you can escape from yourself.
keti, it's your fault for our drifting.
after that night...
stop it!
i can't take that anymore.
keti, why don't you admit?
tell the truth.
i told you the truth a thousand times.
lies, all lies!
why should i lie?
for giving food to the starving driver?
giving food?
and whiskey on the table?
you gave yourself to the first man who wanted you.
that's not true.
that's not true?
why was the young man so confused when i saw him in our bathroom?
why?
you were angry, without reason.
without reason.
trust me, alen.
if you want to give him life, alright.
that's your right.
but my right is to take it!
marko, i have something to tell you.
later.
but it's important.
i'll come after you.
he only thinks of death.
he'll lure her here.
mara!
if you forgive him, don't do that under her influence.
you'll put your guilt on her later.
besa likes him.
what are you talking about?
he loves that child.
your father loved you too.
would you spare his life because of that?
i asked him to join the partisans, he wasn't a coward but he stayed, to be with you!
enough!
you told me that!
so what?
i was talking about your father!
why only about him?
he wasn't the only one who was killed!
he wasn't!
many people have their snipers, but everyone should take care of his.
i don't care if he's mine or someone else if he's a monster!
you'll punish him then?
you'll never make a decision.
never mind.
i'll do that myself tomorrow.
you think that the court will pardon you?
even your credits won't help you.
i don't care behind which window will i sit.
what are you looking at?
send besa to bring some schnapps.
i'll be sober by dawn.
you won't need your crutches tonight.
we had a fight today.
no, we hadn't.
so we won't make up?
alright, we had a fight.
you're going to the reefs tomorrow?
only there you can find chamois.
tell him there isn't any anywhere.
i can't.
what if he's innocent?
he's not innocent.
i have to go.
leave him, let it go.
cancel the hunt.
he knows!
what?
his wife heard your conversation last night.
he knows?
i thought he'll live if he fins out.
are you angry?
why should i be angry?
go now, uncle is alone.
if he asks his crutches, don't give him.
and put away the guns, and lock the door.
you're not going home?
i have to arrange the hunt.
cancel the hunt.
i'll be back soon.
cancel the hunt!
marko?
marko!
where is marko?
i have to talk to him.
about the hunt?
about the hunter.
about the hunter from the war.
asking for pardon?
no.
he wouldn't get one.
you're wrong, alen didn't kill marko's father.
how do you know that we suspect him?
i heard your conversation with marko.
if you found out about our suspicion, you didn't avoid it.
you're wrong!
alen couldn't have done that!
i know him better than you do.
but you didn't know him 20 years ago.
i don't want it!
you're afraid of him.
he didn't change.
he stayed the same man.
that!
he had tough childhood.
he was humiliated and insulted.
who wasn't humiliated and insulted?
but still, we're not all snipers.
you wanted to hear that.
you're looking for justification for your hate.
that's not true!
i came to stop you!
why wait until tonight?
i knew marko won't kill him.
even marko didn't know that.
more schnapps.
there's no more.
you're keeping mi safe from vices?
i'm saving schnapps.
you're a cunning selfish old man!
you should get some sleep.
why are you addressing to me differently?
when you're alone, i call you by your name.
and when there's two of you, then...
two of us?
keti and higins, you mean?
very good!
i'll call you by your name from now on, because you're always alone!
it's beautiful, real soldier.
you'll tell him?
what good will that do to me?
he can escape.
him to escape?
alen higins?
of course...
to run from whom?
from crippled old man.
and marko?
he won't shoot?
what would you want?
to sleep.
did you tell him?
what?
things you hear last night.
i did.
and what did he say?
ask him.
i want to know!
what is it marko?
speak german.
is that an order?
it's more than that.
you seem to forget you're in foreign country.
you seem to forget i'm a foreigner.
yes, i almost forgot.
go away.
just a minute.
clean this.
tomorrow morning at 4.
i'll be waiting you.
keti, come here.
i'm going to bed.
sleep, my dear.
sleep nicely.
your efforts are in vain.
i know you're not drunk.
but you are.
drunk from love to yourself.
from your vanity.
i don't know...
come on.
i don't know...
calm down.
it doesn't matter.
go to sleep.
they'll kill you.
kill?
they'll kill me?
why?
who is that?
hunter from the war.
you.
me?
nonsense.
what that suppose to mean?
you don't know?
then i'll explain to you.
let's sit.
we have to hurry.
why are we rushing so much?
he'll kill him!
i can't forbid them.
and if that's not him?
then he won't kill hi,.
come on, uncle janko, please.
and tell them it's not him.
i will if he's not.
just tell.
why to lie?
i wasn't afraid of them then, not now!
uncle janko!
it's not yet time.
but i'm impatient.
so am i.
we can go soon.
i'm unarmed.
yes, it's clean.
how much do i owe you?
you'll pay for that.
no!
hands to yourself!
wait!
is that him?
take out the target.
i want to check my sight.
no.
it's not him.
impossible.
not even close to him.
where did you get the gun?
marko, it's not him.
it's not the sniper.
it is, it's him.
trust me, he's not our sniper.
he's not ours.
you promised that you'll go to the village.
should i run away?
why don't you tell them?
no way!
are you going to the hunt?
tell me, for whom do you actually worry?
maybe for you.
don't worry dear, marko won't dare.
what if he still do it?
why didn't he dare so far?
he's just showing off.
and you?
you'll see.
hold this for me.
here, place it.
drop the gun!
now!
marko!
wait!
it's not my fault!
it is your fault!
i didn't kill your father!
you didn't kill mine.
you're are a killer.
you said there's no killers.
yes, in war.
but now it's not war time.
but war could repeat, because people like you.
no!
wait.
don't.
wait.
uncle.
i got you some flower.
let me go, let me go!
why don't you shoot now?
with what?
with an empty gun?
the end
translated by inglourious @kg
__file_terminal__
previously on "the ultimate fighter"...
[ groans ] ...keon caldwell quit the competition...
i want to go to my daughter.
...creating an opening on team dos santos.
[ cheering ]
i think we did it.
underdog chris cope fought his way to victory
in a surprise three-round decision over javier torres.
chicken salad out of chicken [bleep]
that's what we are.
we chicken [bleep]
we make do with what we got, right?
now team lesnar has evened the score,
and brock is preparing to make his first fight matchup.
i'll pick from team lesnar.
who will be chosen for the next round of battles
in the war to become the ultimate fighter?
¶ there is no substitute for ¶
¶ the ultimate is what's in store ¶
¶ bear witness to the fitness of the modern warrior ¶
¶ and they go boom, another hit is landing ¶
¶ boom, another hit is landing ¶
¶ the stealth of a sniper, the strike of a viper ¶
¶ they're training to challenge the ultimate fighter ¶
¶ you're gonna get hit ¶
¶ you're gonna get knocked out ¶
¶ you're gonna feel it ¶
¶ this is the ultimate ¶
¶ you're gonna get hit ¶
¶ you're gonna get knocked out ¶
¶ you're gonna feel it ¶
¶ this is the ultimate ¶
captions paid for by pilgrim films and television, inc.
[ laughter ]
we're all sitting there.
we're all like, "did brock call us chicken [bleep] last night?
[ laughs ] time to step up, boys.
reality's setting in.
so, let's see, after chris wins his fight,
brock comes in very jovial.
all right, that's what we do.
that's it.
we change chicken [bleep] into chicken salad.
i was like, "did this [bleep] just called me chicken [bleep]
like, what the hell?
lesnar:
i see lenny's attitude's getting worse every day.
maybe he needs to fight.
this morning he comes in, kind of just "whatever.
yeah, i think it was 'cause they got the comment.
what comment?
the chicken [bleep] comment.
think that was it.
well, somebody needs to step up.
that's the problem.
you know, it kind of got to me at first,
and i think it kind of got to a lot of us.
you know, i ain't no chicken [bleep] that's for damn sure.
come here, fellas.
have a seat right here.
i just want to clarify
this chicken [bleep] chicken salad issue, all right?
before you guys got on this show,
you were one in two million people, all right?
you guys were just another fighter,
just another 170-pound chicken [bleep]
but now you guys are chicken salads, all right?
that's what i'm trying to say here, okay?
seize the moment, fellas.
you get one chance.
believe that you are here for a reason.
keep this ball rolling and stay positive and believe.
you have to believe that you can win this show.
chicken salad, baby.
let's go.
one, two, three.
together:
win, win, win!
davis:
we're all gonna really miss keon.
we were worried about who they were gonna bring in,
'cause right now, we got a real good dynamic with our group.
everyone's, you know, disciplined.
everyone's working hard.
everyone gets along,
and everyone's headed in the same direction.
and if we get kind of a knucklehead,
it might cause some tension.
[ knock on door ]
hey.
what's up, fellas?
what's going on?
ryan.
justin.
nice to meet you.
when i first walked in the gym, i didn't know what to expect.
kind of felt like i was walking into a jail cell.
welcome.
thank you, thank you, thank you.
what's your name?
justin.
edwards.
yeah.
and i came in and saw my team,
and everybody's real, you know, family oriented.
they kind of took me in with arms wide open.
it feels like it's gonna be a good fit here.
randy.
randy couture, man.
i get that everywhere, man.
i get stopped in the casino all the time
asking for autographs or whatever.
yeah, small randy.
[ laughs ]
he still looks really young.
[ laughter ]
i look good for 43, don't i?
[ laughter ]
polley:
i was just very frustrated with the idea
that as coaches, we weren't doing everything possible
to put the guys in the right position to win.
a few things are gonna change,
for sure.
you know, i told junior i want to start training these guys
how i was trained, and i know how junior was trained.
junior's being way too nice
'cause he's looking at them like kids,
not like men in a gladiator sport
about to fight other men in the ufc.
now isn't the time to have soft feelings, without a doubt.
coach bailey and junior -- they're nice.
they're gonna be positive and all that stuff, you know.
i'm gonna be a lot more realistic.
let's go.
why are you on the cage?
you're losing.
you're losing right now.
you're losing the fight.
let's go, zach!
let's go!
when you lose, we lose.
you guys lose, i feel it.
junior feels it.
[bleep] furious right now 'cause you're better than that.
you guys are entirely too nice when it comes to competition.
get it out of your head that you have to be nice.
[bleep] that.
let's get better.
how do you get ready for a fight?
you [bleep] fight.
[ grunting ]
come on, come on.
come on, come on, come on.
he's cut.
ohh.
let's go, let's go, let's go.
come on.
come on -- patch it up, take it,
get ready to come back.
nijem:
shamar got cut, you know, and we were going really hard,
and the problem is, is i wrestled, you know, in college,
so i understand what it takes,
and that's what wrestling practice is every day,
but there's a fine line
between over-training and training hard,
and i feel like, you know, we've crossed it just a little bit.
i don't like training like that
and the screaming and saying bad things.
i don't know.
i don't like that.
that's not my way to train.
but i bring lew because he's very good,
you know, in wrestling.
and lew was very sad after javier's fight, so i thought,
okay, i will let you push the training tonight
and make whatever you want.
sometimes i don't have words to say for you,
how proud you guys make me, you know?
training hard and try to do your best
is the important thing in the world.
and be nice.
[ laughs ]
i'm canadian.
we're always nice.
yeah, you are.
you are.
i agree with that.
this fight announcement is brought to you by dodge.
we are dodge, and we are ever neutral.
team lesnar has now taken control of the fighter picks.
our pick from team lesnar is len bentley.
[ applause ]
why we chose len was we noticed
that lenny had a little bit of an edge, you know.
he was getting kind of of edgy,
and we figured if we held him back for another week or so
that we might lose him.
our fighter pick from team dos santos is ryan mcgillivray.
[ applause ]
dos santos:
i think len is a better wrestling guy than ryan,
but i think ryan's hands is way better than len.
i think he got heavier hands and punch harder than len,
so i think that's gonna be the way.
[ applause ]
nijem:
where do you live?
cope:
san diego.
oh, really?
you should come there sometime for some training.
i know, dude.
cope:
now it's just come to the point
where we're starting to create bonds,
you know, amongst each other,
and it's kind of weird because as time goes on,
you know, team lesnar and team dos santos
they'll be hanging out more often.
'cause then it's gonna be, like, if we all wanted to fight...
yeah, i know.
you guys, seriously, you guys can't tell chris nothing, man.
i'm gonna tell the coaches tomorrow, too.
don't be telling them nothing of your game plans.
he's that guy.
chris was spending a lot of time with the other team,
and that's fine.
i mean, it is what it is.
i don't care about the drama.
i'm not here for the drama,
but, you know, i don't really trust him.
hey, but you know what?
he got us the control, so...
i don't know if i trust him 100% yet,
but i'm grateful for what he got for us.
yeah, for sure.
every time he talks, he annoys me.
yeah, he's hanging out with the other team right now.
he hangs out with them more than us for sure.
chris is definitely the investigator.
i'm trying to keep him at arm's length.
i like the guy, but i think he's kind of playing both sides here.
bentley:
who thinks i'm talking to the other team?
they're just skeptical.
it's all eating away in their head, you know, the competition.
think about how you were a couple days ago, you know?
[ laughs ] i don't know.
just look at it through the eyes of chris two days ago,
who hadn't fought yet, you know?
like, you're still, like,
thinking about the game aspect of it all, you know.
you already got your first fight out of the way now,
so you're a lot more relaxed over the whole situation.
i'm a covert spy.
i'm working for the other side.
yeah.
i started karate when i was in fourth grade,
so i've always been athletic.
and i love karate.
i took it very seriously, and, you know,
i started becoming a professional,
full-time mma fighter.
i don't think anyone learns to be a fighter, honestly.
you either are or you aren't.
this is the opportunity of my lifetime, you know.
i've had some big fights.
i've fought some tough guys, you know.
but no matter who i fight on the show,
this is the biggest opportunity i've ever had.
time.
perfect.
chris.
who?
chris cope.
oh.
a whole lot of time talking to those guys.
so, he's been sitting here
watching me all [bleep] day, all right?
will you talk to him, keep his mouth shut?
he really has been
you're better than this other kid.
he can tell him whatever he wants.
i'll talk to him.
i know, but it's a mob factor, you know what i mean?
don't get caught up in the bull [bleep]
just fight, all right, lenny?
just fight.
i don't want the coaches talking about my game plan
around chris because, you know,
i don't know what he's gonna say to the other team.
not that i care, you know.
a fight's a fight, and i'm gonna do what i'm gonna do anyways.
it's just mob factor.
it's a matter of principle.
it's no different than my opponent having all my film.
we picked him.
we picked this fight because we think no matter what,
you can beat him.
yeah, for sure.
so don't get caught up in all this other stuff.
you're here for one reason and one reason only
just to fight.
okay.
all right?
yeah, i'm going to.
all right.
that's all you got to do.
you know that.
don't get caught up in this other stuff.
lew wants me to rotate everybody around.
he wants what?
he wants me to rotate everybody 15 minutes, 15 minutes, 15 minutes.
who?
lew.
[ laughs ] ryan's got a fight.
dos santos:
lew is a very good person,
but sometimes he thinks, like, pushing the guys too much
and goes speaking with the guys and forget about us,
you know, his team.
i told you for coach, push ryan.
and you told jimmy you're gonna switch for 15 minutes.
we asked if you want to do that
no, no, my buddy,
you are here because you are a wrestling coach,
but you help me with other things, you know?
i am the coach here, you know,
so we have talk each other which other one
and with the guys, you know?
you have to follow it because i want.
you don't want nothing.
we want, you know?
for sure, for sure.
polley:
i know for sure i get overzealous with the guys
and want to kind of do as much as possible
and do this and do that.
i might get out of my lane sometimes and things like that,
so junior was basically saying, you know, "we're a team.
we got a stay a team, even the coaches.
we have to talk about everything and work as a group,
things like that.
he's like, "i'm sorry i had to be so serious,
but i had to get my point across.
i was like, "no, man.
it's fine.
he's like, "no, thanks for understanding.
got me?
yeah, yeah, yeah.
ow!
thank you, bro.
[ laughs ]
i'm right-handed.
sorry.
[ grunting ]
mcgillivray:
my little girl -- she's the reason i'm here,
so she's my strength, and, you know, if i didn't have her,
i don't know if i could do this.
but with her being at home and knowing i'm doing this for her,
that's all the drive anybody could ever need.
ryan, ryan!
one, two, three, four, five.
come on.
for me, it's a good style matchup.
whether len tries to take me down or keeps it standing,
i feel pretty comfortable in both areas.
head shot, head shot.
i know he was their number-one pick, so he can't be all bad.
to take out the number-one guy would be a big boost for us.
elbows.
elbow.
yeah.
good, ryan.
polley:
what time is weigh-ins?
4:00?
yeah.
ryan was weighing about 180.
really isn't that bad, you know.
it may sound bad to some people, but it wasn't that bad.
you'll need a sauna suit, albolene,
six bottles green rubbing alcohol,
three bags of epsom salt, blankets, and yourself.
the whole process will take 40 minutes.
mcgillivray:
it meant a lot to me to have junior and the other coaches
come over and help me to cut the weight.
it's no secret, i guess, so far
that i've been the heavier one in the house.
not for lack of trying at all.
it's just maybe i'm a fatter kid than the other guys.
see his face?
right now he's sweating.
this is what you're gonna have to do when you go to 205.
ahh.
[ laughs ]
polley:
you know, ryan is a gamer.
he's focused.
he's sharp.
he has a great mind for the sport.
we just got to get this win for ryan and the team,
and i think he'll pull it off.
dos santos:
for sure.
so if it doesn't go past one round, i see her...
it's gonna be a pleasure.
gentlemen, welcome to another weigh-in.
we'll start with mr. len first and then mr. ryan.
lesnar:
this is a guy that, when we first evaluated him, said,
i just want to fight, and i just want to do this.
i'm here to win the show.
well, here's your opportunity, fella,
and, you know, let's see some chicken salad.
170.
thank you.
[ applause ]
dos santos:
i'm excited to see ryan fight
because he's a little bit taller than len,
and i hope everything goes good for him.
170.
thank you.
[ applause ]
well, i ain't gonna be here to witness it tomorrow, lenny.
i hope you're all right with that.
i understand.
i want to wish you good luck, okay?
unfortunately, i've had some personal issue come up
in my personal life.
i explained to the guys
that i wouldn't be here for the next fight.
so, good luck to you.
thanks, coach.
all right?
just sit back, eat, chill out.
my personal life comes first, and everybody knows that.
bentley:
i feel good.
my body feels good.
my mind feels good.
a little nervous.
got a lot on the line here.
game plans are huge,
and it's definitely not something
that i want the other team, you know, getting ahold of.
that's why this morning i went to the gym.
i got my run in, and then me and the coaches alone, just us,
we drove my game plan and went over what we were gonna do.
know the game plan?
set a goal.
step to the task.
run in, double jab, cross.
bam.
mcgillivray:
i really try to, at the time of my fights,
to think about myself, not to think about "has he trained?
how was his cut?
things that i can't control,
i try to take right out of my mind,
think about how hard my training camp was,
the sacrifices that i had to do.
i think about my family a lot.
today's my little girl peighton's second birthday.
you know, i missed her first steps.
now i missed her second birthday,
so these things are a little bit tough,
but once the fight's over,
i look forward to having a little pie
just to celebrate her birthday.
bentley:
it's kind of like getting on a roller-coaster ride, really.
you're so nervous getting in line.
you're, like, terrified.
you almost want to turn back, but they don't let you.
i think fighting's the same way for me.
good one.
i look forward to a really game fight.
he seems like a game opponent.
he's got a lot of fights and experienced guys,
so it should be a good test.
beautiful.
thanks, coach.
good luck.
ryan, you're gonna fight now.
oh, nice.
you go through the same worries every single time you fight.
no matter who it is, no matter who the opponent.
[ cheering ]
but once you step in the cage,
you realize there's no backing out.
you can't leave.
you can't run away.
you can't ask for help.
aah!
just have to bite down,
put your hands up, you know,
and fight for your life.
let's go, lenny.
your time, ryan.
show him.
show him who is ryan mcgillivray.
come on, ryan!
[ cheering ]
got to do work, ryan!
come on!
your time.
mcgillivray:
i look forward to a really, really good fight,
hopefully one of the best fights of the season.
just know that i'll be coming hard
and i'm gonna be looking to finish every second i get.
this tale of the tape is brought to you by miller lite.
triple-hops brewed for that great pilsner taste.
taste greatness.
all right, this fight is two 5-minute rounds.
if at the end of the second round
the judges declare it a draw,
we go to sudden victory.
the winner of that round wins the fight.
good luck, guys.
[ cheers and applause ]
let's go, lenny.
all right, gentlemen, you ready?
you ready?
let's fight.
dos santos:
that's it, ryan.
come on!
the fight clock is brought to you by edge shave gel.
when we're getting ready to get ready, we get ready with edge.
together.
[ cheering ]
make him feel bad.
good.
one more time, ryan.
[ cheering ]
move him, ryan.
[ indistinct shouting ]
push his face down.
push him down.
there you go.
no, don't give up the back.
don't give him the back.
hands up.
hold him.
yeah.
push his -- his ribs.
his ribs
push.
push it down.
keep him flat.
push his ribs, ryan.
push him flat.
flatten him out.
yeah.
nice, ryan.
good job.
sweep him.
yeah.
good job, ryan.
good job.
[ cheering ]
elbows.
those are good.
keep going, ryan.
hold the other foot.
the other foot, ryan.
nice.
cross-face now.
more, ryan.
more.
more, ryan.
again.
again with that.
elbows, ryan.
elbows.
two.
control.
control the inside.
go, ryan.
there you go.
nice.
control the inside.
try to slip him out again.
let's go, ryan.
work it.
there he is.
there you go.
that's it.
yeah!
hands.
hands, lenny.
[ indistinct shouting ]
go!
yeah!
good job, ryan.
good job.
[ indistinct shouting ]
move him, move him!
that's it.
body.
good stuff.
together.
now.
good.
yeah.
[ cheering ]
he's hurt!
[ cheering ]
keep going!
elbow, elbow, elbow.
recover, lenny.
push the face!
yeah, push his face!
push his face!
watch out!
yes, yes!
yeah!
that's it!
pull his undercage.
watch out.
[ indistinct shouting ]
armbar!
[ indistinct shouting ]
fingers out.
let the fingers out.
punch his abs.
nice!
push!
pull your arm!
there you go.
yeah, keep going.
[ indistinct shouting ]
triangle!
elbow!
[ indistinct shouting ]
keep the pressure.
20, len!
[ indistinct shouting ]
[ air horn blows ]
[ applause ]
i don't know.
that's a tough one to score.
breathe, breathe.
relax.
strictly technique, baby!
work your feet!
he's tired.
you have to push him this round.
he will break.
give him a reason to quit.
let's go.
force that air in.
[ whistle blows ]
let's go, let's go, let's go!
all right, gentlemen, let's fight.
[ indistinct shouting ]
nice!
there you go.
movement.
[ indistinct shouting ]
dos santos:
yes!
[ indistinct shouting ]
yes!
feet, feet!
on your feet!
fight, fight, fight!
come on, lenny.
[ indistinct shouting ]
that's it.
come on, len!
[ indistinct shouting ]
more pressure now, ryan.
there you go!
face up, ryan!
[ indistinct shouting ]
combination.
combination, ryan.
combination.
[ indistinct shouting ]
circle, circle.
watch your head.
[ indistinct shouting ]
move the legs!
[ indistinct shouting ]
move the legs!
[ indistinct shouting ]
elbows and knees.
[ indistinct shouting ]
30 seconds, 30 seconds.
[ air horn blows ]
[ cheers and applause ]
get it in.
come on.
you may have already won the fight.
bring it in.
gentlemen.
good fight, guys.
that was an awesome fight.
yeah.
this fight replay is brought to you
by the united states marine corps.
the few, the proud, the marines.
that was an impressive fight.
len comes out, hits him with a left hook, drops him,
jumps on top of him, and, you know,
grounds and pounds for a while.
[ indistinct shouting ]
then ryan comes out and drops him,
jumps on top of him, and works from the top.
[ indistinct shouting ]
[ air horn blows ] i have that round dead even.
gentlemen, let's fight.
white:
round two is pretty even, too.
both guys were exchanging punches back and forth.
ryan went for a takedown up against the fence.
len got in there and got some good knees to the body.
i mean, ryan came to fight, i came to fight,
and we put on a good show.
hopefully it was an entertaining fight.
[ indistinct shouting ]
[ air horn blows ]
all right, judge jarman scored this fight 19 to 19.
judge trovert scored it 18 to 20.
and judge griffin scored it 18 to 20
for the winner by majority decision ryan.
[ cheering ]
ryan's fight was amazing.
he showed he is very tough.
very tough fighter.
[bleep] [bleep]
bentley:
well, i thought it should have at least gone a third round,
but it's my fault for leaving it in the hands of the judges.
white:
len looked bummed out,
but len has nothing to be bummed out about.
len's had the best fight since the competition started.
[ exhales sharply ]
let me tell you what, dude.
that's how you fight.
you got nothing to be [bleep] embarrassed about.
that's how you fight, boys, right there.
you go out and you [bleep] let it all go.
anything can happen on the show.
that was an awesome fight.
you got nothing to be bummed out about
and nothing to be embarrassed about
when this thing airs on tv.
get the family around and watch it 'cause you should be proud.
thank you, sir.
all right?
good job.
[ clears throat ]
dos santos:
they did a wrong pick.
you proved that, man.
you just took out their best guy.
their best guy.
they thought you were gonna be soft.
for your daughter.
mcgillivray:
i can't really express all that meant to me.
most people could tell that i was a little emotional after.
it meant a lot.
dos santos:
she's proud of you, man.
when she watched your fight, you beat that guy up
man.
she said, "it's my dad.
[ laughs ] "this is my dad.
this is my dad." yeah.
[ applause ]
let it out.
let it out, ryan.
let it out.
mcgillivray:
i've never really been emotional after a fight, but...
[ sighs ]
[ sniffles ]
yeah, i know you miss her, man.
sitting there with my daughter when this airs
is gonna mean a lot to me.
it's gonna mean a lot.
that's all i can say.
on the next episode of "the ultimate fighter"...
[ laughs ]
oh, god.
...team lesnar wonders if ramsey nijem
has what it takes to be a fighter.
o'neil:
we're not sure if ramsey knows he has to fight while he's here.
am i gonna have to fight?
or does ramsey have them playing right into his hand?
everyone thinks i'm just here for tv, let them think that.
these are the four ugliest guys?
they're not that bad.
former welterweight champion matt hughes drops in
to run brock's guys through a wrestling clinic.
oh, sorry about that.
and junior looks to keep his lead in the competition
when he chooses the fourth preliminary matchup.
who will become the next ultimate fighter?
__file_terminal__
stephen hawking's universe
an answer to everything
stephen hawking's universe" is made possible... by alfred p. sloan foundation to enhance public understanding... of the role of science and technology.
the arthur vining davis foundations.
the corporation for public broadcasting.
and viewers like you.
corporate funding is provided by amgen.
unlocking the secrets of life through biotechnology.
at amgen, we produce medicines... that improve people's lives today... and bring hope for tomorrow.
stephen hawking:
in the last hundred years,
our understanding of the universe...
has advanced far farther than in previous centuries.
we have discovered that the universe and time itself...
had a beginning 15 billion years ago.
there was a cosmic explosion of energy...
called the big bang.
the energy produced...
all of the matter in the universe,
from stars and galaxies to our own planet...
and even ourselves.
yet one question still needs an answer.
how did the big bang begin?
we need to know the laws...
that held at the moment of creation
when the universe sprang into existence.
are these initial laws over and above the laws
that tell us how the universe evolves?
or is there a theory of everything...
that governs the universe at all times
and determines how it begins and develops?
narrator: "i shall never believe." said einstein,
that god plays dice with the world.
words that might bring gloom
to the gambling capital of the east.
atlantic city has two sides...
one that's flush with big casinos,
one old and simple as a small town.
today, physicists are grappling
with a dual universe...
one great as all the cosmos, one infinitesimally small,
both a puzzle to sydney coleman.
coleman:
physics starts out by trying to explain
the sort of phenomena that occur in everyday life...
balls bouncing and planets round and round the sun,
and all that stuff.
and that's also pretty much the sort of stuff
that you encounter in everyday life,
and your tacit assumptions about those things
and how they behave are deeply embedded
in the language of everyday speech.
that's how the language of everyday speech developed.
narrator:
but physics has now gone beyond the familiar.
theorists like coleman spend their days
making imaginary journeys into strange new worlds,
far removed from everyday life.
as physics develops
and physicists want to find out more and more,
they try and understand physics
which reveals itself only under extreme conditions...
on the inside of an atom, in a high-energy accelerator,
in a quasar, during the beginning of the universe.
now it would be really remarkable if the concepts
of everyday speech continued to be valid
when we extend the universe of study so enormously.
it's only natural that,
as we get farther and farther from everyday experience,
the theories we have to describe all this new stuff
in addition to everyday experience,
should look less and less intuitive.
why should your intuitions have developed
to be good inside a quasar?
your ancestors did not spend any time inside quasars.
so things seem to get,
from our viewpoint, our earth-bound viewpoint,
stranger and stranger.
narrator:
that the universe is vast and expanding
is accepted wisdom.
that it began at a tiny point
is accepted as well.
each extreme has its own theory to describe it.
coleman:
when you trace the evolution of the universe
backwards in time, you inevitably find yourself
being pushed towards the physics of the very small.
narrator:
the world of the minute
has its own peculiar laws.
and it was at this scale,
millions of times smaller than a single atom,
that the universe began.
the study of the subatomic realm
is called quantum mechanics.
woman:
two foundation stones, really,
on which we've built current modern picture
of the universe and the matter in it
are quantum mechanics and general relativity.
einstein was instrumental in both of those theories.
he was a founder of quantum theory
and the sole inventor of general relativity.
and the picture that they give us of the universe
is a very good one in the sense,
we can make a lot of predictions
and explain a lot of phenomena.
but the picture is really only partial in many ways.
and one of the problems is that the two theories,
in fact don't fit together
narrator:
einstein described
the large-scale universe,
a realm where gravity
is the dominant force.
quantum mechanics concerns
the behavior of atomic particles,
governed by forces wholly different.
but a complete theory of the universe
has to embrace everything,
from the tiniest traces to the largest galaxy.
dowker:
einstein believed
that he could find a way to make them fit,
because the methods that he had applied
to problems in physics before had always worked.
he'd been very successful in unifying things.
he trusted his instincts.
so his instinct was that there should be a theory
which described the two theories together.
narrator:
in his twilight years,
einstein pursued a quest he alone believed in.
he went his own way,
dreaming of a single theory of everything.
dowker:
he spent decades on this work.
he worked basically alone.
i think that no one else shared his view
that this was the way to go in unification.
so he was very solitary,
and he was working by himself
up until the day he died.
narrator:
pages of his notes were found at his bedside,
but his unifying theory was unfinished.
he had failed to realize his dream.
but einstein, as always, was ahead of his time.
four decades later,
his quest is being pursued by others.
theorists are rallying to find a single equation
that can resolve the old contradiction
between quantum mechanics and relativity.
they, too, are looking for a theory of everything.
hawking:
at the beginning, the universe is a single point.
the next instant, it is enormous.
to understand this properly, we need a theory of everything,
which is still just beyond our grasp.
however, we already
have some ideas why the expansion
of the early universe was precisely what it was.
narrator:
in their effort to uncover the ultimate mystery,
scientists have intuition and intellect to guide them.
yet slowly their search is being rewarded,
one fledgling theory at a time,
for they do have one more resource at their disposal.
with new technology comes new insight.
observation offers inspiration.
giant particle accelerators, such as slac,
in palo alto, california,
smash atoms into each other.
these collisions create miniature explosions
producing energies, temperatures,
and pressures that mimic
the very conditions of the big bang.
in the 1970s, a striking portrait
of the early universe emerged...
one poised on a cosmic knife edge.
man:
what was always needed,
and nobody had really pointed this out,
was that you had to assume
that the expansion rate of the early universe
was tuned almost exactly right...
that is, almost exactly the right expansion rate
so that the universe would be just on the verge
of eternal expansion versus eventual collapse.
if one talks about the universe
at a time of about one second after the big bang,
this tuning, this precise fixing of the expansion rate,
had to be done to an accuracy of about 15 decimal places.
if the universe just expanded
one part in the 15th decimal place
faster than we thought it had,
it would fly apart
without galaxies ever having a chance to form.
if the universe at one second after the big bang
were expanding with one number less
in the 15th decimal place than what we thought,
then the universe would collapse
before galaxies had ever had a chance to form.
to make the universe work,
the universe had to be perched just on this borderline.
narrator:
for 15 billion years,
expansion has run its course in perfect measure.
what fluke of physical law
managed to strike this uncanny balance?
alan guth was pondering equations of immense complexity.
yet the questions he was grappling with
were so simple,
they were the kind posed by a child.
man:
when i was still a kid,
i asked myself a question...
well, how could it happen
that in different parts of the universe expansion
started simultaneously?
who gave the signal?
how can i understand it?
and then i thought that maybe when i would grow older
i will open the books
which are written by clever professors,
and i will find out the answer.
when i grew older,
i found that people did not know that the question exists.
narrator:
a probing mind is a restless one.
andrei linde, a russian,
has unlocked a secret of creation.
linde:
during the last 15 years,
we've learned that the question can be answered.
narrator:
linde, like guth, now lives in the united states.
but in the '70s,
they were on opposite sides of the world,
unbeknownst to each other, simultaneously working
on the same remarkable theory called "inflation.
so, would you give me a glass of water?
sure.
narrator:
linde and guth found a model
for the early universe in the simplest of phenomena.
if energy had somehow
been trapped in a vacuum then released,
space and time could have expanded,
like so many bubbles.
perhaps these bubbles had collided, united,
then rapidly expanded as one vast bubble,
a symmetrical universe, growing smoothly, quickly,
and evenly in all directions.
linde in moscow and guth in california
were kindred spirits.
both needed to do detailed calculations
to see if the idea could work.
one winter's evening in 1979,
guth opened a notebook and began to write.
guth:
i had not yet calculated everything through, that night,
enough to convince myself that it was a fascinating idea
and that it would probably work.
the next morning
i raced back to slac, and actually i kept track
of my personal biking records to slac,
and i set a new record that morning.
once i got there, i whipped out my notebook
and started continuing the calculations,
and by, i guess, the end of the morning,
i convinced myself that it did fit together.
narrator:
linde was also making headway.
but it wasn't long before his proverbial bubble burst.
the numbers simply weren't adding up.
across the globe, at the same time,
inflation was turning out to be deflating.
guth:
as i continued to work on inflation,
i did however discover that there was a serious problem
in the way that inflation finally ended.
it happened just like water boils.
a bubble would form here, a bubble would form there,
the bubbles would grow and collide
and form an incredible morass of matter
with tremendous non-uniformities in it.
would look, in fact, nothing whatever
like our universe looks like.
this was a serious problem that clearly required a modification.
thank you.
you're welcome, sir.
narrator:
still, guth went ahead and published his work.
despite its flaws, the theory
caused a sensation.
guth:
all of a sudden
my career had just changed overnight dramatically,
and it was an amazing experience that every scientist
should have a chance to have once in his life.
narrator:
in russia, it's against scientific tradition
to publish an idea without
all the details worked out.
linde had labored long and hard,
only to be outdone by his own principles.
worse, he feared his precious theory
might be compromised by its premature unveiling.
today, at long last,
comes a rare meeting of the minds.
linde:
i don't know whether you know or not,
but i had an ulcer
which was induced by your work,
in some sense,
because when i heard about all these ideas,
i was really, literally, thinking in these terms...
that god could not be so stupid
to lose this opportunity
to make the world in such a economical way.
and when i found a solution,
the ulcer is gone.
well, so sometimes physics helps.
narrator:
linde had a new idea.
what if just one bubble of energy had inflated
and become our universe?
linde:
it was about 11:.00 at night,
and i could not keep myself from, well,
this feeling of happiness.
and i came to my wife and eventually waked her up,
and i told her, "look, it seems that i know
how the universe could have emerged.
i first announced a new inflationary scenario
in the meeting of quantum gravity in moscow,
which occurred in october '81.
and at that time, many very good physicists in moscow,
and the star of the meeting was steve hawking.
hawking:
i gave a seminar
with andrei translating.
when i said there was a difficulty
with guth's idea of bubbles in collision,
andrei said that the whole universe
could be a single bubble.
i objected,
because the bubble would have been bigger
than the universe at the time.
linde:
in the middle of his talk,
he told that there was a very interesting idea
of andrei linde recently.
this was just my talk the previous day,
and i was, oh, my heaven, he's translating it.
and then he says
but this model, this idea does not work,
and let me explain why.
and he starts talking and talking,
and i'm translating it,
and for a half an hour,
in the face of all the institute,
i was explaining to them why he knew inflation
just simply cannot work.
narrator:
humiliation came in double doses to andrei linde.
in front of respected colleagues,
he saw his theory demolished.
linde:
and then i told steve,
would you like to actually understand the details of this?
and he told me, "sure.
and then we disappeared for two hours.
all the institute was trying to catch steve everywhere,
and the famous physicist disappeared.
the whole institute was in panic.
hawking:
linde and guth had given us an important idea.
inflation accounts so neatly
for the way the universe has to expand,
i'm sure it must be part of the final picture.
but inflation by itself
does not explain the start of the universe.
we still need a theory of everything for that.
and applying the theory
to the beginning of the universe would be difficult,
because my own work had shown
that the equations would break down
at the big bang.
coleman:
you can take
einstein's equations and run them backwards in time,
not for a real universe,
which is complicated, full of
lumps and irregularities,
but for a simplified model of the universe,
where matter is distributed smoothly and uniformly
throughout the universe.
and when you did run it backwards in time,
you found, eventually, there was a point in which
everything came together at a single point,
where gravitational fields became infinitely strong,
energy densities became infinitely high.
technically we call it a singularity.
narrator:
it is the netherworld of physical law.
a singularity like the big bang is a realm beyond comprehension,
where logic is replaced by chance...
where matter is ruled by mere probability,
and scientists must resort to summing up
the rolls of the dice.
coleman:
physicists like to solve equations.
they like to say,
if this is the way things are now,
this is the way they'll be a year from now.
once you hit a singularity, you can't do that.
the equations blow up,
and you don't know what to do with it.
this is disturbing.
people don't like singularities.
narrator:
the best bet
for solving the mysteries of singularities
is quantum mechanics.
coleman:
quantum mechanics is probably the strangest thing
human minds have ever thought up.
i think if 1,000 philosophers were to work for a 1,000 years,
trying to think up something of maximum strangeness,
they wouldn't have thought up
anything as strange as quantum mechanics.
narrator:
think of it as a game of chance.
quantum mechanics is based on werner heisenberg's
uncertainty principle.
a subatomic particle
is too small to actually see directly.
we can never know with precision
where anything that small really is.
but as it moves,
it traces a path we can try to predict.
we can venture a bet of its probable position.
as it turns out, the uncertainties
taken together add up to revelations altogether certain.
coleman:
strange as it is, it is apparently
the way the universe works
that enables us to make predictions
about all sorts of processes involving atoms
or elementary particles colliding,
that are verified by experiment to amazing degrees of accuracy.
narrator:
the problem is the laws of uncertainty
only make sense for the universe
as a whole at its moment of creation.
they can't be applied to the universe today,
to the stars and planets governed by gravity,
and with motions described by relativity.
coleman:
a lot of people have been trying to combine
quantum mechanics with gravity over the years,
a quantum mechanical replacement
for einstein's general relativity.
hawking:
i wanted to resolve the problem of the singularity.
after all, i was largely responsible
for raising it in the first place.
maybe one could choose a path around it.
coleman:
hawking saw that the uncertainty
that came when you tried
to combine quantum mechanics and gravity
was in fact an escape route,
and could be used to get away from this...
avoid the singularity problem,
which he himself had done so much to raise.
in a remarkable paper
done in collaboration with james hartle,
hawking was able to solve
a very, very simplified model of the universe.
hawking:
jim hartle and i showed
how a universe like our own
could be born without the troublesome singularity.
it involved the use of what is called imaginary time.
this may sound like science fiction,
but it is a well-defined scientific concept
that science fiction borrowed.
the idea was that in imaginary time
the universe has no boundary,
no beginning or end.
it just curls round on itself like the surface of the earth.
coleman:
it was a complete quantum mechanical description
of everything that could be said
about this simplified model of the universe,
and it had no singularities.
it's possible that quantum mechanics
is the answer to the problem of the singularity.
hawking:
i have to make it clear
that the no-boundary universe is just a proposal,
but it has some interesting implications.
without boundaries,
the universe has no beginning and no end.
we don't have to explain its creation.
the universe simply exists.
but the consequences of the no-boundary proposal
cannot be worked out fully
without a complete quantum theory of gravity
that will unite general relativity
and quantum mechanics.
we are back to the search for a theory of everything.
narrator:
while others turn to the heavens for their models,
cosmologist lee smolin looks a little closer to home.
the answer to his universe is not contained
in any mathematical equation.
smolin:
the hope was that there would be one simple law
which would have a unique solution,
which would explain
how the universe is,
the history of the universe, and so forth.
and that hope that all the questions
would be answered in a single law
is what has not happened.
so i wondered about this a great deal.
and i was thinking about this
at the same time that i was reading about biology.
that led me to begin to wonder
whether the answers to some of the questions
in elementary particle physics
did not rest in a single unique theory,
but maybe would be a result of historical accident,
and maybe there could be a process by which,
through a series of developments
in the early history of the universe,
somehow the universe chose what its parameters were.
the wonderful thing about the biological world
is that it's so complicated.
there are so many different species,
they're so beautiful in so many different ways,
and one would think that one could not possibly explain this,
which is of course what people thought before darwin.
what darwin discovered
is that there is a rational way to understand
how such enormous variety and complexity
can come to be in the natural world,
without being put there in the first place.
and the basic idea is that you have some population
which can reproduce itself,
that when it does so,
there are small, random changes in the characteristics,
and that these characteristics lead to differences
in how well the creatures survive.
narrator:
smolin's theory of everything
has a familiar ring.
it's inspired by darwin's idea of natural selection.
smolin:
the universe, like the biological world,
seems to have discovered all sorts of ways
to keep itself out of equilibrium and to keep
an enormous variety of things going on.
and the universe also invents life,
which is very impressive,
and many cosmologists have wondered,
how could it be that all of this
improbable structure and organization comes to be,
out of the world that evolves out of the big bang.
narrator:
imagine the universe as a product
of the same evolutionary processes
that later gave rise to us.
smolin:
if one studies astronomy
on scales much, much larger than the earth...
for example, the disc of a spiral galaxy...
one discovers it's a complex, self-organized system,
somewhat akin to biology on a much simpler level.
it turns out that
the ideas by which we understand the patterns on sea shells
or the stripes on an animal's coat
are very close to the ideas by which we understand
how the galaxies get
their beautiful spiral structures.
what occurred to me was maybe the explanation
for why the parameters of the laws of physics
are right to produce all this complexity
is like the explanation of biology.
the new possibility which darwin gave us
is that a system can have all the beauty
and variety and complexity of our world
and be assembled from itself,
that it can organize itself over time.
what 20th-century science
is leading to is, in my view...
and of course, could be wrong...
the culmination of this view of the universe
as something which does create itself and assemble itself.
of course, it's a new idea,
and it's very, very far from being demonstrated,
although i must say that i'm very struck by the fact
that it wasn't proved wrong yet.
but the idea that maybe the universe as a whole
organized itself by some natural process
makes one feel more at home.
narrator:
what preceded creation?
the theorists who are exploring the question
are pioneers, standing alone at the frontiers
of an impenetrable wilderness.
for andrei linde, this lonely pursuit
was taking its toll.
'85 was the first year of perestroika,
so the first year of perestroika,
gorbachev just came to power,
and they started reconstructing everything,
which is a translation of the word perestroika,
the reconstruction.
and as a first step,
they'd completely forbidden us to send our papers abroad,
so i had a feeling that i am living with my mouth shut.
i cannot tell others what i am doing,
and this was pretty depressing.
so i became so much depressed
that i actually became simply ill,
and now i was lying in the bed
for about a month and a half, and then, all of a sudden,
there was a call from academy of sciences.
they told me that i must go to italy
to give some popular lectures on astronomy.
and i told them, "i am ill, i cannot go.
narrator:
he'd suffered years of frustration
and months of repression.
now linde was suddenly free to say what he liked.
he had 24 hours to find something worth saying.
linde:
after this year with the mouth shut,
they are suggesting to me that if i do something,
then tomorrow it will be sent there
by diplomatic mail without any approvement,
without any signatures,
without any of this bureaucratic work.
tomorrow it will be in italy.
on the other hand, it must be done just immediately,
and i am really sick.
i just cannot.
i took my head like that, and i started thinking,
what can i invent within half an hour or so?
i will write it today in the evening,
and tomorrow i'll send it to italy.
what can i do within half an hour?
and within half an hour,
i have got a theory of self-reproducing universe.
narrator:
in linde's new theory,
inflation must have produced a multitude of universes.
instead of just one growing, there had to be many...
each universe different,
each the product of its own big bang.
in time, they will seed other universes
so the process goes on forever.
linde had experienced his own conceptual big bang.
out of depression had come pure inspiration.
linde:
when i was really going to italy,
i had four papers written
on the theory of self-reproducing universe.
i smuggled them to italy without any permission,
and i came to rome, and i gave lectures in rome.
i came to torino, i gave lectures in torino.
i came to trieste, and i gave the lectures,
and then they delivered my body to the railway station
and put me into a luxurious sleeping wagon,
and i looked into myself in the mirror...
this was '86, where i was 38 years old.
i looked in the mirror
and i have seen the body of an old person,
slowly moving from trieste into the direction of rome.
and then, after a while, i became healthy again.
and since that time i did not have such a depression,
which in a certain sense may be unfortunate.
hawking:
smolin and linde's evolutionary theories
have failed to catch on.
most cosmologists, like me,
still want to find a single explanation
of a single universe.
narrator:
in 1985, a promising new theory emerged,
raising hopes the search would soon be over.
you're tuned to wbai, 99.5 fm on your dial.
coming up next, "explorations" with dr. michio kaku.
welcome.
this is "exploration.
this is dr. michio kaku,
professor of theoretical physics,
and this is a program devoted to science
and the fantastic discoveries as we explore the universe,
and of course, super string theory,
the theory that will perhaps
give us an explanation for the entire universe.
some people say the instant of the big bang,
the universe was a dot.
the new picture is that it's like a bowl of noodles,
a bowl of noodles where we have
thousands and millions of little strings,
vibrating at the instant of time,
that exploded, creating
the enormous diversity of matter and energy
that we see around us.
super string theory is so bizarre, so strange,
that we were not destined to see this theory
in the 20th century.
many of us believe that it's really 21st-century physics
that fell accidentally
into the 20th century.
narrator:
bubbles have their proponents,
uncertainty has its adherents,
but strings are the stuff of zealots.
it's based on a rarefied branch of mathematics,
and it's an idea so ahead of its time
that its time may not yet have come.
kaku:
einstein spent the last 30 years of his life
trying to create a theory of everything,
a theory of black holes, of galaxies,
and a theory of atoms, of light, of force.
so we have two great theories of physics...
the theory of the very big, einstein's theory of relativity,
and the theory of the very small,
the quantum theory.
and these two theories
they are incompatible.
one is smooth, beautiful, like marble,
and the other one is coarse and grainy like wood.
and to get them to meet together has been the object
of the last 50 years of intense investigation.
today, we think we have it.
we think we have the super string theory,
which is perhaps the most fantastic,
the most marvelous theory ever proposed
in the history of science.
narrator:
string theory borders on mysticism.
it contemplates a universe
strewn with minute strands of space-time.
kaku:
strings are extremely tiny,
like 100 billion billion times smaller than a proton,
so let me explain.
take an atom, and expand it to the size of the solar system.
if the atom were the size of our solar system,
then a string is much smaller than that.
a string is the size of an atom.
that is how incredibly tiny this all is.
we also think that once upon a time
the universe was the size of a string.
when strings move, they vibrate.
and when they vibrate,
each note of this vibrating string
corresponds to a particle.
so if i had a microscope
that could peer into an electron or proton,
i'd see a vibrating string.
my own body is essentially a symphony of vibrating strings.
but when strings move, they force the space around it
to curl up, to bend,
exactly as einstein had predicted.
narrator:
strings are the theorist's darling.
they are a structure hatched specifically to cater
to the discrepancies
in the divergent theories of physics.
true, they are wholly abstract, and have little basis
in reality so far,
but at least they may
provide the ties that bind
the two great schools of thought.
we physicists have been puzzled by the fact
that we have matter, like atoms,
and we have forces, like gravity,
that attract atoms.
now we realize that this dichotomy
between force and matter
is really not a dichotomy at all.
these are nothing but vibrations of the same string.
one string that vibrates could be a quark.
another string that vibrates could be an electron.
but yet another string that vibrates
could be light, a photon, or einstein's theory of gravity.
narrator:
string theory, at its heart,
is a search for perfection,
to conjure a vision of creation
of consummate order and purity of form.
kaku:
now, if you look at clouds or rocks or mountains,
we don't see symmetry at all.
but as we go backwards in time,
as we get closer and closer to the big bang,
we realize that there's a beautiful,
gorgeous, magnificent symmetry
that we begin to see emerging as we go backwards in time.
now, we believe
that at the instant of the big bang
there was perfect symmetry.
the only theory which gives us this perfect symmetry
is the super string theory.
narrator:
theorists today are walking a fine line
between models of the universe based on images
we can make concrete,
and concepts that seem, for now, beyond the imagination.
kaku:
these equations are well-defined,
they're well-known,
but some people think that perhaps we humans
are not smart enough to solve them.
think of a duck or a monkey.
why should a duck or a monkey understand calculus
or electric fields or black holes?
and why is it that we have the power
to understand the big bang and the black holes?
and then the question is,
are we smart enough to understand
the theory of everything?
at the present time, no.
hawking:
by the end of the '80s,
i and a number of other physicists
were beginning to wonder if string theory
really was the ultimate theory of the universe.
narrator:
in fact, string theory is no theory at all,
for a theory, by definition, must venture some predictions
that will ultimately be put to the test of reality.
sublime and conceptually perfect as string theory is,
it needs someone to come to its rescue.
kaku:
in the last several years,
we've been in the wilderness.
the mathematics has proven too difficult
to solve super string theory.
the theory is smarter than we are.
the creative engine behind super string theory
is ed witten of princeton.
in fact, scientific american once said that ed witten is
the smartest man on earth.
and if anyone is smart enough to solve super string theory,
it's probably going to be ed witten.
witten:
string theory is a mathematical structure
of a richness and subtlety we don't understand well.
there are many pieces of it that we've come to understand,
and they, by themselves,
are quite elaborate stories in their own right.
we don't yet have
a complete overview of the whole subject.
it seemed pretty clear that if there was a chance
to go way beyond our familiar understanding of physics,
string theory was the most ambitious prospect.
it also was clear then, as it is now,
that it is a very long-term proposition.
narrator:
ed witten has taken on the challenge
of tackling some of the most difficult mathematics
in the scientific world.
witten:
i wasn't originally interested in maths.
i was interested in doing physics.
and i remember very well
having some reticence
for quite some time about
making the 100% commitment,
of really deciding that was going to be my life.
narrator:
witten's quest is to turn out
countless consuming mathematical constructions.
one, he hopes, will someday get strings
to actually describe the world.
witten:
the question was,
how realistic was it as a theory of nature?
my main interest was to make it more realistic.
for a few years there were very exciting developments,
and then we went through a period
where the progress was slower and more subtle.
we were dotting i's and crossing t's
and understanding details.
we were discovering things that were strange and beautiful,
but perhaps not of such wide ramifications
as the things done in the mid-'80s.
so things were slow
and the developments, i guess, were more mathematical.
string theory, as it had developed by the mid-'80s,
was characterized by the fact
that there were five theories we knew about.
and that raised the rather curious question
which was always a little bit embarrassing.
if one of those theories describes our universe,
then who lives in other four universes?
we've come to understand
that those five theories we've been studying
are all limiting cases of one bigger picture.
in the last couple of years, the picture has really changed
through something which is called duality.
duality is a relationship between two different theories,
which isn't obvious.
if it's obvious, you don't dignify it
by the name "duality.
so we have different pictures.
and it's not that one is correct
and the other one isn't correct.
one of them is more useful
for answering one set of questions.
the other is more useful
for answering another set of questions.
and the power of the theory
comes largely from understanding
that these different points of view
which sound like they're
about different universes
actually work together in describing one model.
and i might say that 10 years ago
it just looked impossible that those theories
would turn out to all be one,
so it's a big conceptual upheaval
to understand that there's only one theory
which is our candidate for nature.
to make an analogy
with the blind men and the elephant,
there is the guy who discovered the trunk,
and there's the guy who discovered the tail,
and there's the guy who discovered the ear.
and in the past we thought
they were five different things.
now we know there is one elephant.
we still don't understand that elephant too well.
narrator:
witten remains convinced
string theory can be borne out.
his conviction has its price.
the new world he's charting is a lonely one.
it is populated only by strange and abstract ideas,
by many dimensions,
rather than the three the rest of us know.
a lot of people, even professional physicists,
in my opinion, don't fully grasp the scope and richness
of the structure involved.
people may tend to be too impatient for quick results
in some cases.
i think that there are a lot of reasons
to think that a structure
which is so rich and so physical
and which has been the source,
the continued source of so many beautiful discoveries,
must be on the right track.
narrator:
witten is widely regarded
as the heir apparent to einstein.
on he struggles, with little assurance
his work can be completed in his lifetime.
witten:
when you are doing a calculation,
it's usually on some very specific detail.
that's a tiny, tiny piece of the big picture.
and you're hoping that that piece will shed light
on the big picture.
sometimes it does, but usually it doesn't.
oftentimes you come home
at the end of the day,
and you know exactly the amount you knew
at the beginning of the day.
but sometimes you know a little bit more.
i think that this investigation
is the richest thing that physicists can tackle now.
how far we'll get in our lifetimes,
there's no way to know.
we might get the answers we dream of getting.
we might fall well short.
but i think we can accomplish something,
a faith which i'd say is well-vindicated
by the duality revolution of the last couple of years.
i think we can accomplish more in the future,
and getting as far as we can is the best we can do.
hawking: 20 years ago,
i said there was a 50/50 chance
we would have a complete picture of the universe
in the next 20 years.
that is still my estimate today, but the 20 years starts now.
it's very hard to build
a fully consistent quantum theory of gravity.
the string theorists think they have one.
they may or may not be right.
they haven't yet pushed their theory far enough
so you can compare
the consequences of string theory to experiment,
and that's what you ultimately need.
narrator:
while theorists around the world
pursue their lone predictions,
many are pinning their hopes
on a singular mission.
neil turok is preparing for a journey into the unknown.
he's about to explore a place called the past.
when he gets there,
he'll tell us what it looks like.
turok:
imagine you were trying to navigate across a continent,
and you had a map which only showed features
greater than 100 miles across.
it wouldn't be much use in finding your way
along a particular route.
but if you have a map that has a resolution of a mile,
then that becomes much more useful.
narrator:
turok is setting out
to make the map of all maps with a satellite
he plans to help launch early in the 21st century.
it's called the planck explorer.
turok:
what we'll do is look out,
map the whole sky at a very high resolution.
basically, this is equivalent to making a map of the earth
where you show all the rivers and the mountains
and the valleys in exquisite detail.
and this map will contain a vast amount of information.
it will give us
the best picture we have of the universe.
narrator:
the planck explorer
will be able to detect energy that was emitted
billions of years ago at the dawn of the universe.
for a study that has too long
searched for answers in the mind's eye,
it might provide a vision of sheer clarity.
turok:
it is a map of the universe
at very early times.
we're not sure quite when the radiation
from the big bang was emitted from the plasma
in the early universe,
but when we look out and we see the sky,
we're looking directly
at different patches of hot plasma,
and they are going to be
at slightly different temperature,
and so this will be a map
of the temperature variations on the sky.
narrator:
in those subtle vestiges of the big bang
are the secrets of its inception.
they will bear the signature of creation,
and with any luck,
the revelation that will clinch which theory wins the day.
the time may soon be at hand to know the ultimate truth.
i think people are usually
excessively confident about the theories,
because there has been an absence of data,
and that's allowed people
to be confident about the theories.
the current theories there are, are all based
on very clever ideas and very imaginative ideas,
but what's really good about them is
they do give you a well-defined framework
within which you can make predictions.
narrator:
we've already glimpsed the temperature fluctuations
of the big bang, but never in sufficient detail.
each theory of everything predicts a different outcome
to turok's experiment.
perhaps he will at last settle the question,
or perhaps he'll only raise more.
turok:
we're in the wonderful situation now
where over the next 5 or 10 years,
the theory is going to be beaten to death,
or theories that we have will be beaten to death
in terms of making predictions.
that will all be settled,
and they'll all say exactly
what they expect to find on the sky.
and then this satellite will fly
and will map the sky to very high precision,
and we'll see what happens.
it's a very exciting time to be involved.
it's a unique opportunity in science where you're told,
within 10 years we're going to have the data
that will prove or disprove
any theory of how structure formed in the universe.
and you've got 10 years,
so we'll see if anyone gets it right.
hawking:
it could be that in a few years
we will have a complete theory that is confirmed by experiment.
it would be a remarkable achievement,
perhaps the ultimate triumph of science.
but knowing how the universe works
is not enough to tell us why it exists.
to find the answer to that question
would be to know the mind of god.
to learn more about "stephen hawking's universe,
visit pbs online at the internet address
on your screen.
captions by vitac:
burbank,pittsburgh, tampa and washington, d.c.
stephen hawking's universe" was made possible
by alfred p.
sloan foundation to enhance public understanding
of the role of science and technology,
the arthur vining davis foundations,
the corporation for public broadcasting,
and viewers like you.
corporate funding is provided by amgen,
unlocking the secrets of life through biotechnology.
at amgen, we produce medicines
that improve people's lives today
and bring hope for tomorrow.
__file_terminal__
thisisthelaststop onour
audition tour.
it's the only city we've been to
all eight seasons in our search
for america's favorite dancer.
[dramatic music]
♪♪
and it never fails to deliver.
we're in the city where stars
are made and dreams become
reality.
[cheering]
these are the l.a. auditions.
♪♪ [upbeat techno music]
♪♪
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪so you think you can ♪
♪♪
♪so you think you can ♪
♪♪
♪so you think you can dance ♪
♪dance ♪ [cheering] all:
welcometo losangeles!
[cheering]
l.a.!
shuffleup.
yeah!
[cheering] thousandslinedup brightand
early...
and this is what everybody's
competing for.
that all-important ticket to
vegas.
the contestants file into the
theater, ready for their
close-up.
on the panel, as ever,
executive producer
nigel lythgoe...
along with ballroom expert
mary murphy...
and our very own emmy
award-winning broadway
choreographer tyce diorio.
[cheers and applause]
here's how it's going to work.
dancers that fail to impress
will be sent straight home.
wow.
it's like something out of
the exorcist.
sorry,it'sano.
ifthejudgesare onthe
fence, they'll be asked to learn
some choreography at the end of
the day.
well,obviously,yesfor
choreography.
yesforme .
butthebestofthebestwill
be handed a plane ticket
straight to the next round of
auditions.
youwerefabulousout there.
come and get your ticket for
vegas.
oh,mygo sothejudgesweresettogo
in l.a. and jordan casanova
was putting the final touches
to her hollywood makeover.
iguessyoucouldsaymy
alter ego is being fierce.
[giggles]
the moment you put me on stage,
i'm a completely different
person.
today, i am performing a solo
to naughty girl by beyonce.
the song does not describe
anything about me.
i am an innocent person.
and...
cuemusic.
[rb music plays]
♪♪ oh.
whoo!
whoa,yeah!
all right!
nigel, she's good!
♪♪
i like her!
yeah!
yes!
good!
whoa!
allright.
whoo!
nigel,comeon !
whoo!
yeah!
[laughs]
oh, she's really good!
enoughalready.
enough.
[cheers and applause] wow!
[laughs]
[giggles] thatwasoneofthehottest
performances i have ever seen!
thankyouso much!
mygosh!
you are only 18 years old and
you just nailed it.
i mean, from the second that you
just did even your little click
back there in the back, it was
like, "i own this.
you are just so self-confident
about what you're doing too is
what i just love about you.
thankyouso much.
tyce,what'dyouthink?
i loved it!
ha-ha!
didyouloveit?
idon'tevenhavewords.
findthewords.
it'slikenaughty,naughty,
naughty girl!
sorry.
that'snumberone.
number two, it was like, "aww!
loved it, loved it top to
bottom.
amazing.
um,i 'mgonnahavetobe
careful what i say, otherwise
i'm gonna sound like some dirty
old man here.
no!
um...
what i will say is i always ask
dancers to grab the audience.
yeah?
and you certainly grabbed me.
you picked me up, you threw me
around, you dropped me down,
you kicked me, you picked me
back up again.
iwouldneverkickyou.
youdideverythingthere.
you just controlled me from the
moment you started dancing until
i stopped you.
and i had to stop you then.
i really did.
i was gonna have another heart
attack.
i don't think there's any
discussion here, is there?
there'snodiscussion,none.
you're gonna fly!
[cheers and applause]
fly!
itwasonly9:00inthe
morning and the judges were over
the moon.
and jordan's taking a trip... whoa!
wasthatyourtoe ?
tovegas.
yeah!
[cheers and applause] wow!
thatwaswow!
hello.
d.c.chapmanwasstill
waiting to audition, but he
already had a reason to
celebrate.
i'mherewithmygirlfriend.
um, she's five months pregnant
and i'm really excited to be a
father.
wasitplannedorwasita
surprise?
um...
wecan'tsay.
[giggles] ourparentsdon'tknowthis .
we-we-we-we planned it.
mm-hmm.
rightnow,josie'sliving
with my and my family.
we're all living together and,
uh, it's pretty fun.
go, carly!
watchinghimwithour babies,
i know he's gonna be an awesome
dad.
[laughter] we'reonebighappyfamily.
[chuckles] cheese!
hi.
howdy.
what'syourname?
uh,mynameisdariond.c.
chapman and this-- dariond.c.chapman.
howyoudoing?
whatstyleyougonnadofor
us?
idon'tknowifyoufromthe
west coast, but we be doing a
little bit of c-walk up over
here.
right.
coulddothat.
uh, what else?
i got a little
a little harlem shake.
that's back in, like-- right.
okay.
we got the dougie.
or we can cat daddy.
i mean, we can do that.
you feeling that right here?
wait,whoa,whoa,whoa,whoa .
seemstobe bigoverhere .
whatwasthatone ?
it'sthecat
it's a new dance.
it's the cat daddy by the
rej3ctz.
catdaddy?
thecatdaddy.
catdaddyby therej3ctz.
yougrabyourhandslike a
wheelchair, "skirt.
right.
youwantit to "skirt.
so you "skirt.
right.
skirt.
andyou..."skirt"!
then you get back up like that.
[cheers and applause]
skirt"!
yes,andthenyou dip .
nowhe'sscaringme.
thenyoudipattheend.
it's a little dip.
there you go.
one, two, dip, nigel.
there we go.
yeah!
[cheers and applause] wow.
okay!
thisguyis givingyou-- comeonthen!
bring it on.
ijustwanttosayonething
though.
hewantsto saysomething.
i'llsayonemorething
before i dance.
i was--i was extremely scared
to come in here last year,
season seven.
me and my girlfriend made a
promise to come here in season
eight and, uh, baby, thank you
so much for making that promise
with me, 'cause i'm about to get
it cracking.
[crowd awws]
we have a little baby boy to be
expecting also.
oh.
[cheers and applause] thankyou,guys.
whydon'twe seewhatyoucan
do?
yeah, let's do it.
[cheers and applause]
and cue music.
[lounge music plays]
♪♪ [laughs]
love that.
♪♪ wow.
♪♪
oh, wow.
♪♪ ah!
whoo!
right on his rib cage!
♪♪ [laughter]
♪♪
[cheers and applause]
♪♪
[music stops] [cheers and applause] wow.
wow.
oh,mygod.
[cheering continues] wow.
youknow,idon 'tthinki've
enjoyed a routine like that
since season four when twitch
did the conducting.
remember that?
yeah.
uh.
[chuckles]
that was the most entertaining
thing i have ever seen.
whoo!
thatwasfantastic!
yeah,peoplelikeyou are a
rarity.
thanks.
ithinkthatwhatyoudidis
so unbelievably loud.
it's incredible.
it's like i won't forget this.
iwantto go to vegas.
youtranscendwhatthisshow
is all about really, because
there is no way i can sort of
compare that to a ballet routine
or a jazz routine.
that--that stands out for
itself.
[cheers and applause] crowd:
vegas!
youwerefabulousout there.
come and get your ticket for
vegas.
[cheers and applause]
iappreciateit ,nigel.
thank you.
sowe'retwofor two and the
judges are already in love with
los angeles.
thiscity'sunbelievable.
don't you think it's ridiculous?
ialreadyknewhewasgonna
do a good job because everything
that he does out there he does
for me in my life.
so you're always
you're the best, baby.
oh,mygod,thankyou.
comingup...
a champion returns...
to root on her younger sister.
ifyoufailme, you 'renot
coming home.
butdoesthelegacyendhere?
we'vegotto stopthat.
it's off-putting.
butfirst,thecityofangels
has the judges in seventh
heaven... you'regoingto vegas!
andgetsavisitfrom avery
naughty santa.
[screams]
ihaveasix pack.
listen--oh!
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪ welcomebackto so youthink
you can dance.
it's almost noon and dancers are
still filing into the theater... herewecome,baby!
wegotit !
gettingnumbersandfilling
out forms.
a process arielle coker knew
only too well.
eachyear,imadeitfurther
and further.
um, season four, five, and
seven and so i'm hoping season
eight will be my year and maybe
i can make top 20.
that would be amazing.
[cheers and applause]
i would absolutely love for this
to be my year.
but if it's not, i'll be back
next year and i'll be better,
so that's cool too.
cuemusic.
[ethereal dance music]
♪♪/i
ithinkshe'sstronger.
sheabsolutelyis .
♪♪/i
wow.
thisis--thisis an audition.
funny.
whoa.
wow.
are you kidding me?
♪♪/i holymoly.
wow.
[cheering]
nigel.
[music stops]
oh!
[cheers and applause]
okay.
arielle, i said, "i wonder if
that amount of work has paid
off.
i truly think it has.
thankyou.
ithoughtthatwas absolutely
mesmerizing.
and that little bit where your
little toes took you around like
that... [laughs] somegreatstuff.
thankyou.
andyouwerejust
captivating.
the energy that was coming out
of your body just with that walk
forward was tremendous.
you've improved every single
year i've seen you.
yeah,i lovedeverysingle
second of that piece.
i mean, when you talk about a
knockout number that has it all,
that was it.
thankyou.
beautiful.
[cheers and applause]
ihavenever--idon 'tthink
i've ever seen anybody come back
with more of a fire in their
eyes.
you're like a star up there.
it's incredible.
thankyou.
yeah,i can'tbelievehow far
you have come in the last few
seasons.
she'sgotabit furtherto
come though, hasn't she?
yes,absolutely!
you're going to vegas!
vegas!
[cheers and applause] wow.
i wasn't--i wasn't expecting
that.
soarielle'sjourneytoward
the top 20 continues.
and as the afternoon went on,
it looked like she'd have some
fierce competition.
[dance music]
♪♪/i andthatwasn'tjustgood .
that was very good.
♪♪/i
ithinkyou'reamazing.
gettheheckout ofhere .
that pissed me off it was so
good.
boy,canyoudance!
you can!
[cheers and applause] oh,mygod!
bymid-afternoon,it looked
like the final city on our tour
might be the best ever.
[screams] mary,whereis losangeles
getting all these dancers today?
where are they coming from?
afterthebreak,one dancer
has come from halfway round the
world...
i'mfromjapan.
[speaking japanese]
peace.
andshe'spickedupa few
tricks.
ilearnedfrommyloverat
the time.
youdon'tsay.
blush.
plus,afteran amazingstart,
will the golden state continue
to shine?
doyourememberadaylike
this in los angeles?
orwilltinseltownloseits
glitter?
oh,god!
thank you very much.
[laughter] nigel,you'rean [bleep]!
iamwicked,aren'ti?
yes.
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪/i
♪dance ♪/i
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪ [punk rock music]
♪♪ welcomebackto so youthink
you can dance.
when people want to become a
star, they come here to
hollywood.
and they come from all over the
world.
i'mfrombrazil.
i'mfrombelarus.
andi 'mfromhawaii,
island of oahu.
andwhereareyou from?
chandler,arizona.
whohaveyoubroughtwith
you today?
ibroughtmy momand mydad
and my boyfriend, my grandma,
my two younger sisters,
and that's it.
anddidyouall comeinthe
same car?
yes.
we just strap grandma to the
top.
just kidding.
[laughter] butperhapsno onehad a
longer journey than hiro mcrae.
i'mfromjapanand ... [speaking japanese]
america is changing my dancing a
lot.
super duper much.
japanese people have such
discipline.
they are practicing thousand
time of this.
okay, this, this, this.
keep going.
next, next, next, doo, doo.
it's like a martial artist,
but they sometimes forget about
expression.
you know, live in the dance.
ooh, if i can get the las vegas
ticket, oh
i should make it.
hopefully.
good luck, hiro.
[chuckles] myself.
hi.
konnichiwa.
hi,what'syourname?
mynameis hiro.
hiro mcrae.
hiromcrae?
yes.
andwhereareyou from?
i'moriginallyfromjapan.
howlonghaveyou beenhere ?
fouryears.
oy,canicongratulateyouon
your english?
yes.
thankyouso much.
[speaking japanese]
thank you so much.
yes, i didn't have money to go
to school, so i learned my
from my friend, from movie,
from radio, from my lover at the
time.
it was a really hard time.
[cheering] whatdidshelearnfrom him?
[giggles]
oh!
youdon'tsay.
blush.
uh,we'dlovetoseeyou
dance now.
hai.
[cheers and applause] wow.
and...
cuemusic.
[dance music]
♪♪/i wow.
♪♪/i
whoo!
oh, man.
oh!
whoo!
[music stops] [cheers and applause]
uh,uh,uh ,idon 't
i don't really know what's
happening today.
it'sgoingcrazy,nigel!
uh,i don'tknowifyou'dbe
any good at doing anything else
with partners or the waltz or
the...
vietnamese tango,
whatever.
i don't care!
i loved what you just did.
[cheers and applause] thankyouso much.
arigato.
youaredefinitelysomething
else.
you are extraordinary.
you are a standout.
you're a star up there.
your movements are so precise.
the control of your body is so
articulate.
got it all going on.
[cheers and applause] what?
what?
whatplanet?
what?
where did you come
where did you come from?
everything about you is
magnificent.
that's it.
ridiculous.
incredible.
listen.
i think we've been extremely
remiss with the terrible
disaster that's happening in
your home country at the moment.
is all of your family safe?
are they well?
mydadfinallyemailedme
back that they are fine.
oh,good.
[cheers and applause] thankyouso much.
ithinkthat...
you need now to email your dad
back and tell him you're going
to vegas.
[cheers and applause]
sohollywood'snewestaction
hero is headed to sin city.
oh,mygod.
oh, my god.
thatwasso muchfun .
thathurtmy feelings.
yeah.
tyce,i mean,what-- it'sjustcrazy.
doyourememberadaylike
this in los angeles?
no.
andafterthechoreography
round, things looked even
better... wethinkyoudid anamazing
job right now and we want you
to come to vegas!
[cheers and applause] there'syourticket.
vegas!
as18moredancersgrabbed
tickets to the next round.
ican'tbreathe!
whoo-hoo-hoo!
whoo!
it'sprobablythebestday
that we've ever had on the
series, any year.
iagree.
anyseason.
absolutely,100%.
anyseason.
upnext,santaclausis
coming to town... thinkthere'llbe alot of
kids blocking their chimneys
right now.
yeah,that'sright.
anditlookslikeeveryoneis
on the naughty list.
ididn'tenjoythatatall,
actually.
thenit'sallornothingfor
one contestant.
ifyoufailme, you 'renot
coming home.
canshestepout ofher
sister's shadow?
allofthepressureisnowon
you.
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪ all:
welcomebacktothecity
of angels!
[cheering] it'sthefinalday of
auditions, and in l.a.,
a new group of excited dancers
have packed the streets ready to
go.
[cheering]
after a spectacular first day,
there was a holiday mood in the
theater...
and our first contestant of the
day was ho-ho-hoping the good
cheer would last.
what'sup,y'all?
this is big c, the claus of
krump, little c's protege.
i'm from the north pole, of
course, and i spread buckmas
cheer all year round and give
presents to all the good little
girls and boys.
oh, well, hello.
what do you want for buckmas?
[laughter] and...
cue music.
[dance music]
♪♪
uh-oh,uh-oh,uh-oh.
look out.
uh-oh.
whoa!
[screams] [laughs] no!
no!
♪♪ wherearewe goingtoday?
makeitstop.
[chuckles] [indistinct]tryingto do to
people?
[cheers and applause] bigc .
what is little c gonna say when
he sees big c?
he'sgonnasay,"buck!
whatareyoudoing?
ihaveasix pack.
listen--oh!
ah!
[cheers and applause]
that was more like a kegger.
[laughter]
ithinkthere'llbea lotof
kids blocking their chimneys
right now.
yeah,that'sright.
or setting a fire in there.
[giggles] itwasalot offun.
thank you so much for coming
down.
thankyou,guys,verymuch .
i appreciate it.
[cheering] sobigcfailedtogethis
claws on a ticket to vegas.
that'sthefirsttimewe've
had a santa though, i must say.
backtotheworkshop.
andasthemorningwent on
and the hot streak of day one
became a distant memory...
the judges were noticeably more
frosty.
ididn'tenjoythatatall,
actually.
oh,god!
thank you very much.
[laughter] [rock music]
♪♪
there was nothing going on
there.
ithinkwe 'regonnahaveto
call it a day.
nigel,you'rean [bleep]!
don'tgetupset,sweetheart.
♪♪
so what do you think about
twitch's uncle?
[laughs]
iamwicked,aren'ti?
by1 :00p.m.,l.a.had lost
its luster.
youall[bleep,bleep].
andafterasensationalday
one, the city had a lot to live
up to, much like our next
contestant.
hi,mynameisalexismason .
i'm 18 years old.
i found this girl out in the
hallway somewhere.
[squealing] it'smysister,jeanine
mason, season five winner.
thatsoundsso formal.
america'sfavoritedancer
is...
jeanine.
everytimeanybodycomesup
to me and will be like, "oh, my
gosh!
like, you're jeanine's sister!
like as if, like, she's some
sort of god.
i sit there and i'm like,
this is the girl that--
i can't say that on tv.
wait, let's scratch that.
i was gonna say, "that runs
around the house naked," but i
won't.
[laughter]
i was afraid to audition after
she did it, and i feel like i
can't not do it and regret it
later.
youcando this.
no pressure.
i'm so proud of you.
if you fail me, you're not
coming home.
whosaysthatwheni'mabout
to dance?
who says that to their sister?
hello,younglady.
hello.
what'syourname?
mynameis alexismason.
andwhois yoursister?
ihaveno ideawhatyou're
talking about.
theannoyingthingmustbeto
have her sit in the audience
when you're auditioning as well.
i mean, that's tough, isn't it?
imean,it 'sdifficult,
but it's a privilege.
she's my inspiration, so.
go,girl.
allofthepressureisnowon
you.
howamigonnahandlethat?
howareyou--that'sexactly
right.
lots of love and luck.
good luck.
here we go.
thankyouverymuch.
[cheers and applause] and...
cuemusic.
[soft piano music]
striking, striking girl.
♪♪ beautiful.
♪♪
[music stops] [cheers and applause]
mm-hmm.
um, alexis, be careful of one
thing, which is...
with your mouth.
okay.
it'soff-putting,becausei
can see the emotion in your
face, i want to go with you,
and you've got this slight
goldfishing going on.
okay.
wehaveto stopthat.
but, um, absolutely beautiful
control.
beautiful content to your work.
thankyou.
uh,itwasthrillingtowatch
it.
thankyou.
alexis,yoursisterisan
amazing dancer...
and you are an amazing dancer
too.
thankyou.
ican'ttellyou ,sittingon
this side, how fun it is for me
to, you know, see the two of you
be able to share this kind of
experience on this show.
it's just so cool.
thankyou.
youpulledit off.
you really did.
whoo!
thankyousomuch .
ithinkthegreatthingabout
what just happened is
i don't know if i'm right.
but did you look at her?
yes.
thatwasmy--thatwas my
favorite part, because it was,
like, a real moment.
you're beautiful.
thankyouso much.
[cheers and applause] mary,wassheonthehot
tamale train?
[laughter] she'sdefinitelygettinga
ticket on the train for sure.
whoo!
she'sdefinitelygettinga
ticket to vegas.
[cheers and applause] that'swhatwe wanttohear
right now!
both:
whoo!
comingup...
day two in l.a. has all the
makings of a hollywood
blockbuster.
drama... letitgo ,girl.
intenseaction... youareastar,younglady.
andgratuitousviolence.
doyoufighteachother?
never.
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪ welcomebackto thevery
stylish l.a. auditions where
patty ann miller has a swagger
all her own.
i have to say i love your look.
thankyou.
it'ssocuteand ,like,
tomboyish and cute and-- yes,i 'ma bigtomboy.
isthiswhatyou 'reall
about?
yes,thisis me .
i'm a hip-hop dancer.
i love freestyling.
i was dancing at the age of five
and five years later, i started
drumming.
rhythm is just something that's
inside of me.
it's natural.
when i'm listening to, like,
music, i hear the drums and i go
off the drums and i just
i just feel it.
i love drumming and i love
dancing, so i just incorporate
the two and it's a great
feeling.
oh!
what'syourname?
mynameis pattya.
miller.
whatdoyoudofora living?
fora living?
yeah,what'syourjob ?
i--i'ma styleconsultant.
styleconsultant?
yeah,that's--that'swhat-- yeah.
bowtie.
yeah.
cute.
we'd love to see you dance.
allright.
you'renotnervous,are you ?
um...
just a little bit.
[laughter] andcuemusic.
[dance pop music]
♪♪
i love her.
i love her, seriously.
♪♪
ilikeit .
i like her.
iloveheralot.
♪♪
yeah.
yes!
[music stops] [cheers and applause] misspattyann.
pattyann,pattyann ,
you are a young lady with a lot
of secrets, aren't you?
[laughs] huh?
just-- youwentto berklee... yes.
schoolofmusic?
yes.
yougraduated?
yes.
fullscholarshipas a
drummer.
[cheers and applause]
you are just so unique.
i like it though.
i really do.
[cheers and applause]
what other
what other dance styles have you
done?
be honest with me now.
letitgo ,girl.
let it go.
letitgo .
[cheers and applause]
come on now.
let it out.
[chuckles]
ididn'thearthe question.
[laughter]
i'mnotgoingtoaskit
again.
don't worry.
mary?
pattyann,youare buck.
[cheers and applause]
you are.
you're really strong in what
you're doing and you are unique,
like nigel said and, you know,
we love that on this show.
thankyou.
comeonnow,pattyann.
you are freaking cute.
look how freaking cute you are!
[applause] uh,pattyann,i'm really
working hard at the moment and
we're gonna be doing vegas in a
few weeks and i'm gonna need a
style consultant in vegas.
so i can't think of anything
better.
hey,pattyann!
[cheers and applause]
who said, "gotcha"?
whoo!
yeah!
oh,mygod!
andasthefinaldayof
season eight auditions went
on...
l.a. proved it had style to
spare.
you'reveryspecialasa
dancer.
[pop music]
♪♪ youareastar,younglady.
a star.
♪♪
idon'tknowwhat'sgoingon
here.
it's been, like, so many great
dancers here in los angeles.
thankyouso much.
no,thankyou.
haveyoueverdancedin
vegas?
no.
sothiswillbea first,
will it?
[cheering]
♪♪ so...
it...
looks...
like...
you're...
going...
to...
vegas!
[screaming] we'veseensomereally,
really good dancers today,
i must say.
whoo!
vegas, baby!
taking it to vegas.
see you there, baby!
comingup,seasoneight's
final audition.
two sisters... whoa!
onedream.
wewantto showthemwecan
actually move and can dance.
butisthereroomforbothin
las vegas?
howwouldyoufeelifwe
broke you up?
♪soyouthinkyou can ♪
♪dance ♪ welcomebackto thefinal
and most talented city on our
audition tour.
delightedwithlosangeles.
okay.
thelasttwodayshave been
almost perfect.
but one thing has been lacking.
ballroom?
alittlebit,not alot.
[laughs] don'tjudgeme .
i'mclassicallytrainedin
ballet and pointe and then i've
taken jazz.
wow.
everything?
have you done ballroom?
no.
pointeballet,jazz,tap .
[mouths]ballroom?
ballroom?
no.
jazz,tap,ballet,hip-hop,
contemporary.
no ballroom, i'm afraid.
like,uh,tyce'strousers.
oh,mygosh.
um,okay-- comeon,nigel!
nigel!
what?
[laughter]
i'm sorry.
ourfinalcontestants,
sasha and natalie mallory,
may not have any ballroom
experience, but they come ready
to show their range.
today,wearedoingapiece
it's kind of a combination of
modern and african.
wedecidedto bringinother
tastes to show the judges what
we can do.
we're not just, like a... both:
one-trickpony.
whoa!
jinx!
we are very competitive.
it's not a bad thing though.
it's a good thing, because-- it'skindof likea-- letmetalk.
sorry.
it's almost, like, having, like,
an extra teacher with you,
because, like, we push each
other.
yeah.
you should have said "yeah
right away.
unfortunately,i haveno
other choice, so.
[chuckles] ah!
they're gonna have so many shots
of us slapping each other.
we'resistersandwelove
each other.
[laughter] natalia... yes.
andsasha?
yes.
okay.
how come you dance together?
wepusheachotherand- - yeah,shemakesmebetter.
like, going-- aww.
sweet.
[crowd awws] allright.
but, like, in class, like,
she just--she pushes me to,
like, better myself and to get
out there and stuff.
doyoufighteachother?
never.
imean,well,wefight
sometimes.
[laughter] wedo,butwelove each
other.
we're good.
we're-- yes,wedo .
ithinkwe shouldsee you
dance.
that'samazing.
that's cool.
oh, cute.
really cute.
[indistinct]together,
aren't they?
socute.
andcuemusic.
[dance music]
♪♪
[music stops] [cheers and applause]
well...
listen.
i've got to say i'm really
shocked.
natalia, you shocked me more
than anything.
i've got to be honest.
um, sasha has obviously got the
better, um, physique as a
dancer.
yes.
you--butholdon here.
you bring so much heart and
technique to it.
you were absolutely tremendous.
thankyou.
fabulous.
um, sasha, you've got everything
going for you.
you've got beautiful technique.
you've got the right facility.
um, i'm impressed with the pair
of you.
congratulations.
thankyou.
[cheers and applause] yeah,youguysare justtoo
cute together and we can just
see your love of dance.
i just loved it.
both:
thankyou.
yeah,greatchemistry
together.
i enjoy you guys and the piece
as a whole, but i
i kind of want more from you
both.
i want to see that light in the
eyes.
i felt like you started it,
but the real question is:
do you know how to take an
audience on this journey with
you?
everyone starts good.
it'sanabsoluteyes tothe
pair of you from me to go on to
choreography.
yeah,it'sayes for me.
yes.
thankyou.
sothedayiscomingtoa
close.
sasha and natalie quickly joined 28 dancers for the choreography
round.
teaching them the moves are
season four's katee and season
six's jakob.
andtwoandthreeandfour- - andafterjustone hourof
instruction, it's time to dance
for the judges.
cuemusic.
[dance music]
♪♪
aftera quickdiscussion,
it's judgment time.
sasha... yes?
comeondown.
we thought you were tremendous.
come and get a ticket.
gogetyourticket.
natalia,youweresoclose
that you should come down and
get a ticket too.
oh,mygod!
no!
[laughter] [cheering] andthegoodnewscontinued
for nine more contestants.
comeandgetyourticket.
ah!
thankyouso much.
[screaming] whoo!
wait!
somebody be my family!
yay!
aw, thanks, mom!
whoo!
nextweek,theauditionsmove
on to vegas!
160 of the nation's best dancers
battle it out on our stage.
comeon!
right!
theirscreams.
you'reout!
andfeelthepressure.
oh,mygod.
yougottaslamthistothe
ground.
pullyourselftogether.
asdreamsarebroken... [crying]i wannago home.
andsuperstarsareborn.
[crying]i wantit so bad.
butwithno question,there
will be blood.
[siren] [sobbing] sync by llsling
__file_terminal__
jeff:
ddon't let the sun d dgo down on me d
daly: ...
each coach will pair their final team members
against one another in vocal battle duets...
as the artists and coaches... dnow i get d ...give it everything they've got.
oh, my gosh.
i never cry.
blake:
don't cry.
i have a little crush on curtis.
emily:
i have to fall in love with curtis
in order to send him home.
it has to be done.
whoo!
daly:
so far, the battles have been intense...
both:
dmake it last all night d
both: djust can't bring myself, no way d
daly:
...leaving the coaches with difficult decisions to make...
oh.
oh, my gosh.
daly:
...to keep only their best.
each coach has already chosen three artists.
with only one spot left,
the coaches and their trusted advisors
share their musical knowledge and talent...
brought my secret weapon
reba mcentire.
how you doin'?
daly: ...
preparing the artists for battle.
adam and casey:
dblinded d dby the light d
christina:
we get down to the nitty-gritty, divvying up the parts
and the harmonies and the stage presence.
you guys can play with the sides of the stage.
i love doing that on tour.
it's really, really fun.
there's so much detail that goes into this.
it's a matter of if they're gonna take it or not
at the end of the day.
it wasn't the right song for your voices.
daly:
with the coaches competing against each other...
adam:
i like to think i have the strongest team.
i don't think that's a secret at this point.
daly: ...
the pressure is on to bring only the best
to the live shows.
my heart's pounding.
i mean, seriously.
that was incredible.
daly:
the battle rounds conclude tonight
on "the voice.
with one final spot left on his team for the live shows,
adam meets with his last battle pairing,
only one of which will advance.
for this battle, i chose you guys, jeff and casey.
casey:
i think jeff is an amazing vocalist,
but i do feel like i am a good performer,
and i'm gonna do the best i can.
jeff:
she's crazy-awesome rocker/techno.
she has so much experience onstage performing.
it's crazy to think that i'm about to go sing
with someone on a level of casey desmond.
for this battle, i chose a song.
it wasn't originally a duet, but it's an elton john song.
it's "don't let the sun go down on me.
if you do it right, it's just kind of a showstopper.
adam:
jeff
i picked and immediately knew he was amazing.
i didn't even need to think about it.
casey is interesting
because i was the only one that picked casey.
that girl is a badass, and it's gonna be tough.
daly:
during the blind auditions, dance-pop artist casey desmond,
who designs all of her own clothes,
turned one chair, catching adam's ear.
di'm on the right track, baby, i was born this way d
daly:
small-town boy jeff jenkins
blew the coaches away and turned all four chairs
singing "bless the broken road.
jeff:
dnow i'm just a-rolling home d
daly:
his mother died one year ago.
jeff:
she taught me how to believe in myself.
daly:
wanting his team to get the best advice possible,
adam brings in his key advisor,
maroon 5's music director adam blackstone.
dbut losing everything d dis like the sun d dgoing down on me d
jeff:
mm-hmm.
but i just wanted to give you the rhythmic reference
so you can, you know, take it where you want.
okay.
[ intro to "don't let the sun go down on me" plays ] di can't light d dno more of your d ddarkne-- d ddarkness d
blackstone:
uh-huh.
yeah.
dclosed the door and left me d
adam and casey:
dand left me blinded d dby the light d
jeff:
i am actually pretty nervous about the battle round
just because casey is such an incredible talent,
she can send me packing.
you're projecting fine to me.
i don't know.
you guys are ridiculous.
you sound amazing.
both of you are insane.
you're amazing.
blackstone:
yeah.
blackstone:
i think your biggest attribute may be a downfall
is that you sing so easily.
so we think that you should...
unlearn" some things that you may know.
oh, yeah.
a lot of times i'm just kind of like,
oh, i want it to sound, you know, as perfect as possible.
right.
but it is really about emotion.
that's it right there.
that's the whole
that's what makes a voice incredible...
blackstone:
yeah.
...marrying those two elements.
right.
and if you did that, the sky's the limit.
daly:
with their battle drawing near,
jeff and casey head to the stage for rehearsal.
both: ddown d don d dme, ohh d dme, yeah d
awesome!
casey:
thank you.
i want to just hear that one note
that wasn't there at the end.
you know what i'm talking about?
i'm missing that.
it's such a huge thing.
something like... dfree, yea-a-a-h, yeah d dto wander free, yea-a-a-h d
casey:
i think i have a good chance to win this competition.
i'm confident in my voice and my style,
and i'm just gonna go out there
with all the energy in the world.
adam:
i'm only gonna say this to you, jeff,
because, like, you have your style,
and i don't want you to change it.
if the vibrato is at a 9 right now,
if you could just, like, take it to a 7.
but, man, you guys...
thanks.
adam:
they're both so strong, and, yes, jeff was the favorite,
but it's probably, i would say, jeff's to lose 'cause here are these two polar opposites.
you have the guy that was a no-brainer that i had to fight for,
and, then, there was the one that no one picked
who's turning out to be so incredibly impressive.
it's gonna be a really brutal decision.
daly:
it's the night of the battle,
and jeff and casey arrive ready to fight
for the last live-show spot on team adam.
casey:
right now i'm going through the song in my head
and just trying to relax.
i definitely don't want to go home.
jeff:
this is something that my mom and i worked for
for a long time,
and, you know, and now that she's looking down on me,
it's just that extra...
okay," you know, "you're doing it, bubba.
you're making your dreams come true.
you're makiour dreams come true.
casey:
i do feel like i am a good performer.
i am really ready to just, like, let loose.
jeff:
i've been waiting my whole life to perform at this level.
i'm gonna make my dreams come true.
[ cheers and applause ]
daly:
for team adam's battle, two talented artists
are vying for one coveted spot in the live shows.
will it be the glam rocker with a love for fashion,
casey desmond... [ cheers and applause ]
oh, she looks so good.
daly: ...
or the humble country boy with the huge voice,
jeff jenkins?
[ cheers and applause ] [ laughs ] whoo!
daly:
the battle round starts now.
[ intro to "don't let the sun go down on me" plays ]
jeff: di can't light d dno more of your darkness d
wow.
dall my pictures d dseem to fade to black and white d [ cheers ]
casey:
dbut you misread d dmy meaning when i met you d
dclosed the door d dand left me blinded by the light d
jeff: ddon't let the sun go down on me d
casey: ddon't let the sun d
jeff:
dalthough i search myself d dit's always someone else i see, yeah d di'd just allow a fragment of your life d dto wander free d doh, yeah d dbut losing everything d dis like the d
both:
dsun going down on me d
casey:
ddon't let the sun d dgo down on me d
jeff: ddon't let the sun d
casey:
dalthough i search myself d dit's always someone else i see d di'd just allow a fragment of your life d dto wander d
both: dfree d
casey: dyeah d dbut losing everything d dis like the d
both:
dsun going down on me d ddown d don d dme, yeah d dme, ohh d
thank y'all so much!
thank you!
[ cheers and applause ]
man:
isn't that sweet?
that's good.
you're all right.
you're okay.
[ chuckles ]
reba:
i couldn't take my eyes off of him.
wow.
he was into it every step of the way.
incredible.
daly:
wow.
team adam, en fuego.
think about that for a second.
let's get some comments from the coaches.
blake?
reba just turned to me and said that she couldn't
take her eyes off of jeff the whole time.
thank you.
i couldn't take my eyes off casey the whole time.
daly:
christina.
christina:
casey, you have a great look.
you have great stage presence.
and, i mean, jeff, we all turned our chairs around for you,
and that's something to not take lightly.
thank you.
daly:
thanks, christina.
cee lo, a few thoughts on that.
jeff, i was waiting to see you do your thing again
because i hadn't seen you since the initial auditions.
thank you.
and you blew me away there,
and the same holds true to this moment.
i got to give it to jeff.
okay.
thank you very much.
[ applause ]
daly:
well, let's hear what your coach thinks.
adam:
what happened with this was,
obviously, we all turned our chairs around for jeff, right?
but casey -- i-i was the only one,
and i thought you guys were all nuts.
'cause you have a tremendous voice.
[ cheers and applause ]
i think that everyone up here that have seen jeff
expected him to do well.
but, casey, to me, your tone is just amazing.
so it's a difficult one.
adam:
yeah.
that's for sure.
daly:
unfortunately, the vote comes down right here, right now.
adam, who is the winner of this battle?
well -- hold on.
blackstone:
[ whispering indistinctly ]
uh...
ah.
all right, well...
i think what i'm gonna say right now is that... dthis is "the voice" d
daly:
welcome back to the battle rounds.
before the break, jeff and casey awaited adam's decision
on who will win and secure the last spot on his live-show team.
i think what i'm gonna say right now
is that there is something about... [ suspenseful music plays ]
...something really just mind-blowing about you, jeff.
i got to take jeff.
[ cheers and applause ] [ up-tempo music plays, indistinct singing ]
man:
there he is!
woman:
whoo!
whoo-hoo!
your mama's proud.
jeff:
thank you.
daly:
jeff jenkins is the final addition
to adam's team for the live shows,
joining casey weston...
casey:
di need you to love me d di need you today d
daly: ...
javier colon...
javier: dstand by me, yeah d
daly: ...
and devon barley.
devon: dwhoa-oh-oh-oh-oh d
adam:
i'd like to think that i have a strong team.
i like to think i have the strongest team.
i don't think that's a secret at this point.
daly:
with one final live-show spot on the line,
it's time for team blake's battle pairing.
all right, i wonder who the next pair's gonna be.
xenia and sara oromchi.
sara:
we are both pretty shy.
i have my doubts going into the battle round
because xenia is very talented.
blake:
you guys are going to be singing...
i'll stand by you" by the pretenders.
[ chuckles ]
i picked you two together because you both seem
like the most bashful.
i want to see which one of you's personalities
jumps out at me during your duet.
blake:
with xenia and sara, it's gonna be a battle
because i need to go into the next round
with that type of personality that will surprise you.
when they open up and start singing,
you wonder, you know, where in the hethat came from.
daly:
during the blind auditions, 16-year-old xenia sang "break even"...
xenia:
dand what am i supposed to do d dwhen the best part of me was always you?
daly: ...
and had to choose between blake and cee lo...
blake.
[ cheers ]
xenia:
i've always been the quiet girl in class.
and for a long time,
not even my best friend knew that i liked to sing.
daly: ...
and earthy singer sara oromchi sang "imagine.
sara: dimagine all the people d
if i stay longer in this competition,
i will miss prom, but, i
you know, i'd rather be here than at [laughing] prom.
daly:
with only one important spot in the live shows to fill,
team blake gets down to business.
hey, guys.
brought my secret weapon.
this is reba mcentire.
how you doin'?
sara:
it's so nice to meet you.
nice to meet you, too.
how are you?
xenia:
hi.
good.
reba has a big personality.
she's gonna find a way to bring it out in y'all, i'm sure.
you're both great singers,
and i'm trying to figure out what your range is,
you know, how far you can push it,
and this song will help me figure out
where to go with you from here, you know what i mean?
reba:
y'all want to sing it together,
just playing along with the piano to make sure you're comfortable with it?
um...
both:
di'll stand by you d
blake: dtake me into your darkest hour d ddarkest hour d
is that too high?
um... dtake me into your darkest hour d ddarkest hour d
sara and xenia:
di'll never desert you d
xenia:
sara's range is a little bit higher than mine,
so it'll be easier for her to reach the higher notes
and kind of sing it a little louder.
this is kind of a straight-across type song
in the melodic part of it,
but at the end, you've got a place
where you can really soar and get up there
and take some liberties with it.
dwhoo, i'll stand by you d
oh, okay.
that makes sense.
sara:
i think xenia's strength is definitely her tone,
so it's a little scary going up against her.
reba:
they are cute as a button.
16 and 18 years old.
blake:
scared to death.
sara:
do you have any tips for me
on how to bring an attitude kind of out, 'cause i think i'm [laughing ] too shy.
reba:
step up and give your all,
because you're only gonna have one good shot at it
this first time.
blake:
mm-hmm.
i want you to scare me
because you're singing so loud and so confident
that i've never heard anything like that before,
and i know you have that ability and you can do that.
reba:
do you sing at home?
i do all the time.
in front of people or by yourself?
in front of my family.
well, just pretend your family's sitting right there.
that's the way the audience is gonna be with you anyway.
they are pulling for you.
i'm telling you, you're a great singer.
man, and i still think...
[ xenia crying ]
blake:
what did i say?
don't cry.
big, old hollick.
what'd you make her cry for?
blake:
it's overwhelming.
i know it.
man, you're so good.
i'm serious.
you really are.
oh, my gosh.
i never cry.
[ laughs ]
xenia:
blake said he was a fan of mine, and it made me cry
because, i mean, just to have somebody,
an artist, tell me that,
it just really made me, like, really happy.
this is something i've wanted so much,
and... [ sighs ] [ laughs ] [ laughter ]
just enjoy it.
have fun with it.
thank you.
blake:
bringing out that confidence is tough.
make her cry for?
blake:
vocally, i think sara may have
a little bit more range than xenia,
but xenia has a more unique sound than sara,
and i think that puts them on a pretty even playing field.
daly:
coming up...
xenia:
dwhy you look so sad?
daly: ...
the coaches must complete their teams
for the live shows,
ending in a shocker that takes everyone by surprise.
[ cheers and applause ] dthis is "the voice" d [ dramatic music plays ]
daly:
it's time for sara and xenia to battle.
one will move on to the live shows...
and one will go home.
i guess you could say this is the battle of the shy girls.
sara:
good luck.
whoever breaks out of their shell more
may be the one that goes through.
and i'm about to step onstage and do that.
xenia:
tonight is a really big moment for me,
and even if i go home,
i don't think i could go back to being that same shy, shy person.
daly:
in this round, two artists from team blake
will fight to get to the live shows.
entering the ring,
accomplished pianist and an aspiring pop star,
sara oromchi... [ cheers and applause ] [ laughs ]
here she goes.
daly:
...going voice-to-voice
with the shy high-schooler with the surprising sound,
xenia.
[ cheers and applause ]
battle round starts right now.
[ intro to "i'll stand by you" plays ]
xenia: doh d dwhy you look so sad?
d dtears are in your eyes d dcome on and come to me now d
sara: ddon't d dbe ashamed to cry d doh d diet me see you through d d'cause i've seen the dark side, too d
xenia: dand when the night falls on you d dyou don't know what to do d dnothing you confess d dcould make me love you less d di'll stand by you d
di'll stand by you d di won't let nobody hurt you d
sara: di'll stand by you d dtake me in, into your darkest hour d dand i'll never desert you d
come on.
that's beautiful.
di'll stand by you, oh d dand when d dwhen the night falls on you, baby d
xenia:
dyou're feeling all alone d dyou won't be on your own d
sara: di'll stand by you d
xenia: di'll stand by you d di won't let nobody hurt you d
both:
di'll stand by d dyou d [ cheers and applause ]
daly:
blake, think about that for a second.
let's get some comments from the other coaches.
christina, what'd you think?
christina:
xenia...
you have a really interesting,
really cool tone to your voice,
and i really, really enjoyed it.
thank you.
and, then, on the other hand,
i felt that you had more confidence, sara,
but your voice was very shaky,
and i know nerves are a huge part of going into this,
and you were definitely pitchy and showing it in your voice.
daly:
cee lo, some thoughts on xenia or sara?
cee lo:
you guys are both able,
and i was equally impressed by the both of you.
daly:
adam?
adam:
hi, ladies.
when i wa-- you're 16?
xenia:
yes.
that's amazing.
you guys are so young.
it was pitchy, and there were nerves flying around everywhere
and notes that weren't being hit.
and to be honest with you, this wasn't your guys' fault,
but it wasn't the right song for your voices, i thought.
blake:
well, you know, he's got a point, you know.
it is a tough song,
but music industry's tough, you know,
and there's times where you got to step up to the plate
and make things happen,
even if you don't like it and it doesn't seem right.
reba:
girls, the thing that i noticed more than anything,
you were really nervous, really scared,
and i saw that in rehearsal,
you know, when i first met you.
daly:
well, blake, it comes down to this.
who is the winner of this battle round?
[ sighs ]
the winner of this battle, for me... [ suspenseful music plays ]
...xenia.
[ cheers and applause ]
man:
whoo!
[ up-tempo music plays ] [ crying ]
woman:
whoo-hoo!
[ laughter ]
daly:
xenia is the last addition to blake's team
for the live shows, joining patrick thomas...
patrick:
di went sky diving' d
daly: ...
jared blake...
jared:
dcan't bring myself to do d dwhat it is you think i should d
daly: ...
and dia frampton.
dia: dit starts in my soul, and i lose all control d
blake:
i felt so strongly about their abilities.
they're gonna step up there
and make the other coaches go, "ah, crap.
daly:
as the battle rounds come down to the wire,
christina is left with just two artists to pair up
lily elise and cherie oakley.
the song that you guys will be singing together
kelly clarkson's "since u been gone.
lily:
i know cherie had her songs
given to major country artists,
and she's, like, the diva of country,
so the pressure's on.
i felt that the two of you
would be a good challenge for each other in fair grounds
because i chose a song that's a little more pop-driven,
which is neither country nor soul.
christina:
interesting for me to have the both of them on my team
come together and sing a type of song
which has a lot of vocal range in it
and some tough notes to hit.
you have to have some lungs in your little body.
daly:
during the blind auditions,
backup singer cherie oakley sang "gunpowder lead"... dhe'll find out when i pull the trigger d
daly:
...and was the only country singer to join team christina.
cherie:
i really am ready to step out of the shadows
and take the stage, front and center.
daly:
and college student lily elise
sang "if i ain't got you"...
lily: dsome people want diamond rings d
daly:
...and found her dream spot on her idol, christina's, team
during the second-chance shootout.
lily:
now that i have this second chance,
it's right there in front of me, and i have to take it.
daly:
christina and her advisor, recording artist sia,
meet with cherie and lily to prep for their upcoming battle.
all right.
let's try this from the top.
god, it's so nerve-racking to sing in front of...
christina:
i know.
and you know what?
honestly, this is just the initial meet.
you will take this home...
sia:
yeah.
and work on it.
...and you will rehearse it, and you'll practice it.
i want to try it.
look, she wants to.
she's risky business.
let's go!
i'm sorry, christina.
well, now i'm gonna push you to do it.
dshut your mouth, i just can't take it d dagain and again and again and again d
whoo!
nice one, babe.
good job!
hey, hey, hey!
sia:
that's really good.
i mean, i guess
cherie:
well, you won.
yeah, that's great.
aw, no!
cherie:
i definitely feel a lot of competition.
i mean, lily is -- she's nailing it.
you know, she's doing a fantastic job,
so i feel like i got to kick it up a notch,
you know, with my performance level.
christina:
i'm not looking for perfection in this battle.
i'm looking for passion and emotion.
throw down your guards, put down your walls,
anything you have,
and just feel free in the moment.
at the end of the day, you just have to go for it.
lily:
it's really surreal.
this person who's always been a picture on my wall
sitting in front of me on a couch, giving me advice
and trying to help me with her life experiences
it really is a moment where you're just like,
is this -- is this a dream?
daly:
as the battle nears,
christina rehearses with cherie and lily.
both: dit was cool, but it was all pretend d
christina:
there was one part that i felt
could call for a little bit of call and response.
i think it's the last chorus that you have.
can we take it just from there?
can i just hear that?
lily: dyeah, yeah d dthanks to you d dthanks to you d dnow i get d dnow i get d
lily:
dwhat i want, yeah d
cherie: di can breathe for the first time d
christina:
cherie's amazing.
i didn't see the amount of confidence
during that first rehearsal that i saw today.
she did a complete 180
from the cherie that i saw the other day.
okay, okay, okay, okay.
that's great.
this is gonna be a tough one.
it's gonna be really hard for me,
sending one of my babies home!
daly:
coming up...
cherie: dshut your mouth, i just can't take it d
daly: ...
lily and cherie give it their all.
it is the moment of truth, christina.
dthis is "the voice" d
daly:
welcome back to the battle rounds.
lily:
now that it's so close, i want it so bad.
so badly.
cherie:
all the people that said,
you don't have what it takes to get up there,
and, "you'll always be a background vocalist,
i'm using all of those things.
lily:
christina took a second chance on me,
so i'm not gonna let her down.
cherie:
you have to walk out there.
you have to believe in yourself.
here you go.
to the left.
lily:
yeah, i'm ready.
[ dramatic music plays ]
daly:
entering the ring, the backup singer
who's ready to step into her own spotlight,
cherie oakley... [ cheers and applause ]
whoo!
daly:
...taking on the college co-ed
who can belt with the best of them,
lily elise.
[ cheers and applause ]
oh-ho!
she's a fighter!
the battle begins.
lily: dhere's the thing, we started out friends d dit was cool, but it was all pretend d
both: dyeah, yeah d dsince you been gone d
lily: dand all you'd ever hear me say d
cherie: dis how i pictured me with you d
lily: dthat's all you'd ever hear me say d
cherie:
dsince you been gone d di can breathe for the first time d yee-haw!
come on!
bring it, baby!
come on!
let's go!
di'm so moving on d dyeah, yeah d dthanks to you d dnow i get d dwhat i want d dsince you been gone d
lily: dyou had your chance, you blew it d
cherie:
dout of sight, out of mind d dshut your mouth, i just can't take it d
lily: dagain and again and again and again d
cherie:
dsince you been gone d
both: di can breathe for the first time d
lily: di'm so moving on d dyeah, yeah d
lily: dthanks to you d cherie: dthanks to you d dnow i get d di get d
lily: dyou should know d cherie: dyou should know d dthat i get d dthat i get d
both:
di get what i want d dhere's the thing, we started out friends d dit was cool, but it was all pretend d [ cheers and applause ]
yeah!
all right!
daly:
adam?
adam:
man.
it's like a transformation has taken place.
there's all these new things happening and new energy,
and you guys were fantastic.
daly:
thank you, adam.
blake?
blake:
i wanted to say something, but reba is driving me crazy 'cause she wants to say something,
so she's got something to say.
reba:
i can't believe.
cherie not too long ago, you sent a song to me,
and i wanted to record it.
and the next time we talked, the song, "turn on your radio,
became a number-one record,
and i called you to tell you it went number one.
and we still hadn't got to meet, and here we are today.
what about this?
daly:
you co-wrote a number-one song for reba?
yes, i'm just meeting her.
yes.
nice to meet you!
congratulations!
[ applause ] daly:
cee lo?
cee lo:
lily, i thought you had a lot of attitude under pressure,
which is an accomplishment,
but you, cherie, you had a lot of control under pressure,
which is an even greater feat to accomplish.
but together, your collective energy was great, brilliant.
daly:
thank you, cee lo.
sia, did you have some thoughts?
sia:
i guess i feel like...
that high note that you hit was pretty spectacular.
cherie, though, you know, she comes up, and she's, like
she'll hit you out of nowhere.
she came and swooped up that note right behind her.
you really did make the song your own.
and, lily, you know, you surprised me all these days.
you've been, like, hanging out
in your sweats and your little sneakers,
and i really wasn't expecting you to come out
like a little hot mama
with your red shoes, high heels, and your little shorts.
so, you look pretty good.
daly:
well, unfortunately...
ahh.
it is the moment of truth, christina.
my two angels.
who is the winner of this battle?
oh, my gosh.
my decision is... [ suspenseful music plays ] ...um...
hey, it's alison haislip here,
your v-correspondent and go-to guide
for all things digital at "the voice.
right now my twitter traffic is bumper-to-bumper
with questions about the coaches' personal style.
for exclusive interviews with the style peeps of "the voice.
and, remember, the perfect accessories
for whatever you're wearing
are always the artists' performances on itunes.
they go with everything.
that is it for me, alison haislip, your v-correspondent.
dthis is "the voice" d
daly:
before the break, christina had to decide
between lily and cherie
for the final spot on her live-show team.
it's so hard, you guys.
um... [ sighs ]
my decision is... [ suspenseful music plays ]
...lily.
[ cheers and applause ]
lily:
thank you so much.
yes!
oh, my god!
daly:
lily elise moves on to the live shows.
man:
my doll!
lily!
[ laughter ]
man:
oh, you did it.
daly:
lily elise completes christina's team for the live shows,
joining frenchie davis...
frenchie: ddon't treat me to these things of the world d
daly:
...beverly mcclellan...
beverly: dand i don't need to be forgiven d
daly: ...
and raquel castro.
raquel:
dwant you to make me feel d dlike i'm the only girl in the world d
christina:
i'm so proud of my team thus far
for going up there and singing their butts off.
and at the end of the day, i'm sure i have no worries...
boys.
daly:
with only one spot left on his team for the live shows,
cee lo meets with his final battle pairing.
miss emily valentine and curtis grimes.
come here.
he's my best friend.
emily:
singing with curtis is bittersweet
because we've been really close so far
in the friend side of the competition.
the song i have put aside for you is...
i need you now," lady antebellum.
hell yeah.
you know it by heart, don't you?
oh, yeah.
i believe that you can sing this song wholeheartedly.
and the same with you.
your voice is so clean and so clear.
when you're trying to express
to that significant other that you need them,
i believe that they'll be able to hear you very clearly.
cee lo:
it's a very unique pairing.
they come from opposite ends of the spectrum.
but in terms of the universal sentiment of the song,
it can be shared.
it can be related to just about anyone.
that kind of evens the playing field.
daly:
during the blind auditions, curtis grimes described
how his ambition to become a professional baseball player
ended in heartbreak.
curtis:
i got engaged, gave up baseball
to go spend every second i could with her,
ended up calling off the engagement,
and that's pretty much the final end of my baseball career.
daly:
he performed blake shelton's song
hillbilly bone"... dyou can't help but hollerin' d
audience: "yee haw!
daly:
...and he was happily surprised
when cee lo turned his chair.
and on the other end of the musical spectrum...
emily:
dtill you're trying to find the you that you once had d
daly:
...city girl emily valentine performed "sober"...
emily:
di'm safe, up high d
daly: ...
then had to choose between blake and cee lo.
emily:
i really would be honored to work with you, cee lo.
cee lo:
i accept!
daly:
to make sure they get only the best advice,
emily and curtis rehearse with cee lo
and grammy-winning recording artist monica.
cee lo:
this is a love song, you know,
but the relationship -- it has to be a little volatile.
and so that should come out in your vocal approach.
emily and curtis:
dit's a quarter after one d di'm all alone d dand i need you now d
like, a mid.
cee lo and emily:
dsaid i wouldn't call d dbut i've lost all control d dand i need you now d
curtis:
me and emily have gotten pretty close, you know.
we've become pretty good friends over the course
of spending, you know, three weeks with somebody,
and this is just one of those places
where there's one winner and there's one loser,
so, yeah, it's gonna suck having to send somebody home
that we've been hanging out with.
di just need you now d
emily:
when curtis is singing,
it's hard not to lose yourself
in his cute inflections and in his accent,
so it's gonna be hard to battle him.
cee lo:
what do you think about your counterpart/competition?
oh, my god.
isn't he cute?
[ laughs ]
i sort of have a little crush on curtis,
and it kind of broke my heart a little bit
that we have to go up against each other,
but that's the name of the game, you know?
love hurts.
[ monica and emily laugh ] that's perfect.
emily:
curtis is an amazing artist.
he's got an incredible, soulful voice,
so i'm really gonna have to step up hardcore
in order to beat the country boy at his own game.
monica:
i think what's special about country singers
is kind of like blues singers.
there's a pain that lies beneath whatever you sing.
keep that, 'cause i think that's the one thing
that no one else here has.
you know my song "forget you"?
you know the little end part where i say "why?
[ monica laughs ]
she told me to do it.
it was her idea.
curtis:
and it worked perfectly.
yeah, it worked.
[ laughs ]
what are you looking for, individually, from me
to win, to say, "all right, you did it, man,
that's what i wanted"?
this is a competition, bro.
so, when i say, "sing your part,
reenact this song as love lost.
marry that girl, you know what i'm saying?
like, you know, be broken up with that girl,
like, really, really get into the character of it.
i think curtis and emily got my point
saying that, "you guys should reenact
the risk of loving someone, the risk of losing someone,
the chance you take with love.
so, it's not about just performing
it's about conveying that passion
and sharing it with people -- win, lose, or draw.
daly:
coming up...
emily:
dit's a quarter after one d
daly: ...
the battle rounds conclude with a shocking ending.
dthis is "the voice" d
daly:
welcome back to the battle rounds.
it's time for the final battle.
there will be only one winner
who will take cee lo's last spot in the live shows.
the other will go home.
curtis:
winning this battle is everything to me.
i'm ready, man.
emily:
i do have a crush on curtis, so it'll be important
for me to remember that one of us will be going home.
i have to take cee lo's advice
and pretty much fall in love with curtis
in order to send him home.
thank you.
curtis:
emily may have a crush on me,
but i already gave up baseball for a girl,
so i'm not gonna lose this time.
at the end of this battle, this cowboy's gonna be
the only one standing on the stage.
emily:
i'm ready.
[ dramatic music plays ] [ cheers and applause ]
daly:
another battle starts now,
to determine which one of cee lo's artists
will move on and which one will go home.
please welcome the competitors
a hardworking country singer from texas,
curtis grimes... [ cheers and applause ]
curtis.
...versus hollywood's outrageous pop rocker,
emily valentine.
[ cheers and applause ]
come on, emily.
you can do it, babe.
the battle starts now.
[ intro to "need you now" plays ]
curtis:
dpicture-perfect memories d dscattered all around the floor d
emily:
dreaching for the phone d d'cause i can't fight it anymore d
both: dand i wonder if i ever cross your mind d dfor me, it happens all the time d dit's a quarter after one d di'm all alone d dand i need you now d
di said i wouldn't call d dbut i've lost all control d dand i need you now d
dand i don't know how i can do without d di just need you now d
dyes, i'd rather hurt d dthan feel nothing d dat all d
emily:
dit's a quarter after one d di'm all alone d dand i need you now d
curtis:
dand i said i wouldn't call d dbut i'm a little drunk d dand i need you now d
both: dand i don't know how i can do without d di just need you now d
emily: dnow d
curtis:
di just need you now d
emily:
di just need you now d
both:
di just need you now d [ cheers and applause ]
[ laughter ]
did you see cee lo's face?
daly:
is there more behind that?
maybe.
we'll see.
[ crowd cheers ]
hold on.
one of you is going home!
not alone, i guess.
let's, uh... [ laughter ]
blake, some thoughts on lady antebellum tonight.
blake:
i mean, cee lo probably told y'all
that he wanted y'all to duet, not "do it.
[ laughter ] [ applause ]
thank you very much.
i'll be here all season.
daly:
adam?
adam:
amazing job.
you have an incredibly -- a distinct voice.
i'm jealous of you, because i sound like a girl
a little bit when i sing,
so you have a really amazing kind of baritone thing happening
that's really unique and really cool.
thank you.
[ cheers and applause ]
daly:
okay.
christina.
christina:
emily, you definitely were a little shaky
in your vocal performance,
but you had a lot of strong notes that you did execute well.
daly:
okay, cee lo.
it comes down to you.
what are you thinking before your final decision?
cee lo:
i insist.
monica:
this one, i throw my hands up.
because you guys are from two different worlds.
i just can't choose.
i would leave it up to you.
cee lo:
i agree with what monica is saying.
i think that emily is out of her comfort zone,
but i believe that this is a safe spot for curt to be in,
so, you know what i mean, i'm partial to the both of you,
but i got to make a final decision, and this time around... [ suspenseful music plays ]
...i have to give it to curtis.
[ cheers and applause ]
whoo-hoo-hoo!
oh, my god!
are you kidding me?
[ applause ]
daly:
congratulations, curtis.
we'll see you at the live shows.
woman:
whoo-hoo!
whoo-hoo-hoo-hoo!
daly:
curtis grimes completes cee lo's team
for the live shows, joining vicci martinez...
vicci:
dand we could have had it all d
daly: ...
nakia...
nakia: doh, i love you, i still love you d
daly: ...
and singing duo tori and taylor thompson.
both: dwhuh-oh, whuh-oh, stuck like glue d dyou and me, baby d
cee lo:
i'm checking out my competition,
and they better be checking me out.
if i do say so myself, i have a very strong team.
daly:
ladies and gentlemen, the battle rounds are over.
thank you, coaches.
thank you, advisors.
thanks to "the voice" band.
join us next week on "the voice," live.
[ cheers and applause ]
__file_terminal__
can you hear me?
i'm numb but i can still feel you sometimes i'm blind but i see you you're here but so faraway
the times when you are not missing
you make me feel like i'm spinning
sometimes you get what you gave
i'm on a course of collision
am not about to give in can't explain my position or the condition i'm in
where i am there's
no limit, no walls, no ceiling no intermission so... let the party begiiiiiiiiin hey hey...
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
can you hear me?
though you may not share my vision
i gotta make a decision
do i go?
do i stay?
you've gotten in to my system
you're in control of my mental
i'm in a euphoric state,
yeah
i'm on a course of collision
am not about to give in can't explain my position or the condition i'm in
where i am there's
no limit, no walls, no ceiling no intermission so... let the party begiiiiiiiiin
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
can you hear me?
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
hey hey
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
hey hey...
all the way
d j let it play
hey hey can you hear me?
enrique
did it again, did it again
mr. morales
subtitled by amin 1991
__file_terminal__
hey..
you!
do you remember me?
like i remember you?
do you spend your life in your going back mind to that time?
'cause i
i walk the streets alone
i hate being on my own
and everyone can see that, i really fell
and i'm going through hell
thinking about you with somebody else
somebody wants you
somebody needs you
somebody dreams about you every single night
somebody can't breathe without you, it's lonely
somebody hopes that one day you will see
that somebody's me
how, how could we go wrong?
it was so good and now it's gone
and i pray at night that our paths soon will cross
and what we had isn't lost 'cause you're always right here in my thoughts
somebody wants you
somebody needs you
somebody dreams about you every single night
somebody can't breathe without you, it's lonely
somebody hopes that someday you will see
that somebody's me
you'll always be in my life
even if i'm not in your life 'cause you're in my memory
you when you remember me
and before you set me free
oh, listen please
somebody wants you
somebody needs you
somebody dreams about you every single night
somebody can't breathe without you, it's lonely
somebody hopes that someday you will see
that somebody's me somebody hopes that someday you will see
that somebody's me
somebody's me
subtitles created by omkar g.
__file_terminal__
hello,
i would like you to touch wood
do you know this expression ?
the easiest way to understand it is referring to the heatwave of 2003 we have well known, may be more in the countryside with agricultural production.
in 2003 this is my place that's what grew and i did not harvested.
when we see this as a farmer one has the right to wonder about the future.
that's why i brought you wood that i will distribute.
touching wood, i think it's good
it makes you feel calm.
it's nice and it smells good.
here's a piece for each of you, if you want to distribute.
it's cherry and plum.
there are probably few in paris.
pass it to the others and we will do a simple experiment
to show that these branches are the future of agriculture.
it seems crazy !
we hear of agriculture at the edge of the drama
and it is true that agriculture is on the brink and we are on the brink.
i'll show you the same experience as i had.
you take the branch and you do like that.
it can be shaped like a circle very easily.
and what i experienced in 2003, in 2004 i did not experienced.
because the flexibility of these small branches that are produced every year growing every day the forest makes them.
the best model for agriculture is the forest because the forest does not need humans.
agriculture has derived to the assistantship, to technology.
farmers who don't understand ground anymore.
farmers have forgotten that the best model and pragmatism of life encourage us to watch the living.
from the living, the forest is the best example.
no human intervention no watering, no fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides it works alone.
when i discovered the flexibility of the small branch
i wondered :
why the branches of large diameter break easily ?
whereas we can shape small branches as a circle that represent the virtuous circle of trees which produces branches in huge quantities.
i found on the internet an explanation of the forest and its soil.
we learn that leaves are attached to small branches it is not because they are fed up that they fall.
they restore 50 to 60% of their content to the branches.
in this branch you are holding,
there all the nutrients which allow buds in a few months to make new branches which contain branches for the following year.
trees restart their growth only with the content of the small branches.
on large diameter branches there are no such nutrients.
as you read this, you think you can already act individually and talk about it to friends and we will cut branches.
the more we are numerous and the more is the occasion to meet, to live well then we cut the branches, we gather them we make pile and grind it in a machine.
this is a technical operation, but not insurmountable.
in africa, we do it with a machete.
we spread it on the ground a layer of 3 to 5 cm, no more.
we realize that this is not prohibitive for a garden with this material which is hidden here.
i will open it later.
when it is placed on the ground in winter, spring we incorporate it.
you mean there is something about seasons?
yes, indeed.
at the arrival of winter, the branches store nutrients.
it's going nowhere but in the branches, only at that time.
in the spring, those elements are diffused again.
so we proceed to what is called incorporation.
after a few weeks the agricultural soil that was here mainly stones has become this.
60 to 90 days after application of a 3 cm thick layer.
here is the top and there underneath.
we see mycelium, the real mushroom.
the mycelium is our collaborator to do what nature does only with mushrooms food chain with the lignin molecule.
the lignin molecule is very energetic and here comes a complex food chain of the soil.
the cultivated agricultural land becomes a forest soil.
it is a copy / paste of forest soil / agricultural land.
it works surprisingly for this stony soil with the rcw to grow wheat
with yields almost higher than normal.
the surprise is enormous, because the trees grow too as well as vegetables.
there you are on limestone plateaus of quercy
i invite you to my place.
i brought you bracnches from my place, but here it is.
zucchini grow in full sun.
no watering, just seedlings.
i plant the seeds in the ground and wait for it to grow.
this year, with 12 zucchinis,
i picked up 190 kilos.
no watering, no phytosanitary treatment, no weed control.
it might looks like the garden of eden we put the seeds in the ground and harvest.
these are my productions.
unfeasible on the plateau.
when you say you are going to grow carrots on limestone plateaus everyone says it, agronomists, experts there are 30 to 40% of stones,
30 cm of soil, impossible.
no water, no fertilizer, no treatment.
yields are 160 to 170 %.
the amount of dry matter is 30% extra.
which means that the plants have less water and are tastier they overcook less easily and preservation is much longer.
no evidence of disease, plague, aphids or pests
it seems magical.
no human intervention.
it is like facing the forest without human intervention.
is it still agriculture ?
is this a new concept?
even in mali, burkina faso, togo, gestures are the same, the results are the same.
when small branches are grinded, we put a thin layer on the floor we see the same phenomenon.
mushrooms of a certain family will take nutrients triggers a food chain which induces life returning in soil.
i have not mentioned the name, but it is rcw
w for wood
r for ramial, branches you have in your hand a very special part of the tree bearing leaves, where photosynthesis happens.
energy from the sun, transformed by the leaves is stored in the branches
this concept bothers agronomy, the farming profession must be reinvented.
you imagine a farm with 20 to 30% of forest area or wood.
it can occur without soil conditioner with 50% less water at least and a yield of 160 to 170%.
you do it every 4-5 years.
it is about sustainability
this concept affects many people but research has difficulties to take it in account.
this package, for those who want, we can share it because it works in the garden, in a flower pot, with a lemon tree or a plant that you like.
you put a layer of 3 to 5 cm thick and it works !
you will have the most beautiful fruits less watering needs and besides it's beautiful, it smells good.
for those that want to smell and take some there is a characteristic smell of forest.
i invite you to share this meal with the ground.
note:
c of rcw stands for chipped
subtitle and translation :
benitron
__file_terminal__
this is a rocket stove.
rocket stoves generally create much more efficient combustion and are better able to store heat than conventionnal stoves.
and so, i decided i wanted to build this stove rather than use the previous one that i had because i wanted to be putting less pollution into the atmosphere but also this stove, you actually feed wood into the top
which means that you can put long pieces of wood, directly into the stove and it doesn't have to be cut to be able to burn.
so, i can put the wood in here and the burning actually happens down in the bottom of this area and then, the flue gas will travel through the stove there is a riser up inside the barrel itself
that creates a draft so that you can actually have the wood feeding in through the top and then the flue gas will travel up, hit the top of the barel on the inside and then there is an opening on
the outside.
on the inside of the barrel but on the outside of the part that comes up in the middle.
all the flue gas will travel down around the outside of the barrel and out through the back and up, out of the chimney.
all this cob here that surrounds the stove is designed to capture the heat from the combustion so that it's not just all going straight up the chimney.
with a conventionnal stove the heat tends to travel out of the building very quickly.
this allows for more of the heat to be stored in the building and then slowly the heat is released over time out of the cob.
so, this is the sky house rocket stove
it is a sort of a wall in between our dinning room and our living room.
basically, you got the intake here the barrel is here and you can see there is a very large amount of cob surrounding most of the barrel here.
this entire wall is actually a cob wall.
basically we got a lot more mass to store heat in we've got a little bit of area where the barrel is exposed so that is gonna through heat in the room quickly when you first light the stove but for the most part we are looking at the stove
to store heat for a long time and we burn the fire here in the morning, we can run it for a few hours and all of this cob will still be warm into the evening.
so, here we are on the other side of the wall, in the dining room.
here is the other side of the barrel encased in cob and then the flue of the rocket stove runs all the way through this bench and up that chimney.
one of the benefit of the rocket stove is that you can have a long horizontal run of your flue pipe and you can monitor a bench or under a bed or wherever you want to store that heat.
normally we have a table here so this one of the seat of the table, that is very popular when we are in winter cause this area gonna stay warm pretty much all day until the evening if we fire the rocket stove that day.
there is about 4 to 6 inches of cob on top of the flue here on the bench so they can take a few hours before it heats up.
i would say 2 or 3 hours but then it wil stay warm throughout the day.
the front of the rocket stove there is only about 2 inches between the flue and the front and that heats up a little faster sometimes it is almost a little too hot so that 4 inches is really great if it's going
to be an area, where you are physically in contact with.
like this bench.
we oil the bench to waterproof it cause it is near the table.
the chimney runs up as cob all the way up into the second story and that, again stores thermal mass up into the bedrooms, upstairs as well.
subtitles :
benitron
__file_terminal__
welcome to basalt mountain located on the northern rim of the roaring fork valley in colorado.
the climate here is hot and dry in the summer and frigid in the winter.
to the point were only a small number of plant and animal species can survive here.
until now no one would have considered farming in this dry rocky nutrient poor soil.
but thanks to our current understanding of nature's natural processes one man has built up a nutrient rich soil upon this dry undesirable clay forming the foundation for a thriving ecosystem
jerome osentowski is the man behind the ecosystem and the central rocky mountain permaculture institute.
nestled on the side of basalt mountain lye one acre of edible forest garden guilds and four passive and active solar greenhouses which have become a large part of jerome's most recent permaculture endeavors
i came to colorado in 1969 and
i spent about the first seven or eight, ten years
as a ski instructor.
and gradually got interested in healthy foods
through having somewhat of a health crisis with hyperglycemia so i decided to look into wild foods and that lead me into growing my own gardens and using wild foods when it was available
jerome began gardening in the lowlands of the basalt area with the understand that it would be too difficult to grow near his home on basalt mountain due to the arid soils and difficulty in harnessing water but once i learned about permaculture
i found that it was totally possible to create these beautiful gardens using recycled materials, and building compost, sheet mulching, using perennial and annual vegetables
in combinations of designs
so, we started annual gardening here for ten years or so and then we gradually segued into perennial polycultures outside and now inside and we've taught hundreds of people here through internship programs and through the different design courses and workshops here.
what's nice about it is that they can come and eat the fruits see the combination of plants in our forest gardens and see how we build our greenhouse
but jerome's success in permaculture hasn't come without some major road blocks
in 2008 a devastating fire burned down one of his first tropical greenhouse's
ironically named pele [after the hawaiian fire goddess] to the ground.
the fire in pele was actually a blessing in disguise.
because we were able to take new technology and design a much bigger, better greenhouse.
so i worked with michael thomson my partner in ecosystems design to redesign the new greenhouse.
at the time that pele burned down jerome had been working with well know local architect michael thompson on advancing greenhouse design by introducing what jerome called "climate battery technology
the destruction of pele gave the two the chance to put their latest research to the test and in the spirit on new beginnings the new greenhouse would be named phoenix after the mythological bird that burns itself and rises from the ashes to live through another cycle.
hi i'm michael thompson,
i'm chief architect with ecosystems design in basalt colorado and partner with jerome osentowski.
the climate battery as we now call it, is a series of tubing in which air is taken in at the high point of the greenhouse, pumped through tubing, and exhausted at the south end of the greenhouse.
and then that air circulates over and over again picking up heat and then delivering it underground and storing it.
so at ecosystems design, we create designs for greenhouses and passive solar buildings and homes as well as outdoor landscaping perennials and annuals for organic agriculture in the rocky mountain region.
in addition to designing indoor and outdoor permaculture and edible landscapes
we create the buildings that allow that indoor growing, such as this one in steamboat springs.
this is a large thirty six by eighty foot greenhouse that will support sub-tropical and anything below that.
and here we have inside the greenhouse, all of these planting beds that we have created above ground and under ground we have these forced air heat storage systems
so all of these fans are delivering air through these vertical risers which then underground distribute the warm air through these horizontal manifolds through these perforated tubes that deliver the heat and the moisture from that air into the soil for use later in the cold nights.
so as a result we get these indoor environments that are very well insulated and heated against winter conditions such as this last year.
and when we have a condition like this where we have very cold weather and snow around the building inside what were experiencing is uhh...
this is when we began the planting of this greenhouse last autumn, and this spring we had this much growth in there.
so we have flowers, we have other plants that support the insect populations for beneficial controls and for pollination, and we have all of the soil conditions and the climate conditions to grow tropical banana plants, and guavas and figs and papaya etcetera.
and these greenhouses also function very well as early propagation centers
where we can start the plants in february that will grow outdoors as annuals.
we also have climate control equipment like these curtains that draw across underneath the glazing at night when its very cold so we have an extra insulating layer for accomplishing that.
so we also do solar homes solar energy productive buildings.
in addition to designing greenhouses for private investors crmpi and growing spaces are building growing domes for local schools in colorado in order to raise awareness about the importance of a local food economy.
the institute has currently built a growing dome at yampa mountain high school in glenwood
springs and the roaring fork high school in carbondale both facilities will be utilized as classrooms for sustainable agriculture curriculums and the food produced will be integrated into the school lunches. there you can find out more about our services and browse our design galleries.
for more information about the central rocky mountain permaculture institute and how you can contribute please visit crmpi.org there you'll find detailed information about our growing dome projects via the community food initiative as well as workshop dates and internship availability.
and built the geodesic growing domes used at the local high schools and special thanks to john cruickshank for his role in the technological advancements of what is now called the climate battery
thanks for watching
__file_terminal__
water
water is
water is life.
bassin de rétention d'eau à tamera
avec sepp holzer et benrd müller
water is life.
water is the most important thing.
the whole world is 70% water.
we, animals, everything-70% water.
water is the key issue for the survival human kind on this planet.
nature has provided enough water everywhere on earth;
but, a billion people do not have sufficient access to clean drinking water.
more and more regions lack the water to grow the food they need.
centralized systems of artificial water management cannot solve this problem.
we need de-centralized systems of natural water management.
we are in tamera peace research center in southern portugal, where a water retention landscape has been in development since summer 2007.
bernd muller is responsible for tamera's ecological research work.
in 2007 the community of tamera still had the question whether a site of this size threatened by desertification could provide food, water and energy for 300 people.
we visited sepp holzer and asked him this question and he brought us this gift the vision of a water landscape.
sepp holzer, an austrian mountain farmer, is a well-known specialist and visionary for permaculture and landscape healing.
water is always at the core of his work.
for me water is the most important capital.
wherever it's possible, you should create retention spaces and collect the rain water and re-learn with the water how to maintain a balance.
this is the most important thing because once you've created the right hydrological balance,
70% of the work is done.
ou help rich vegetation to develop, diversity ecause nature can reveal itself and develop in the right way.
traveling through the world i have not seen a single situation, nation or land in which the development of a water retention landscape would not give the first important healing impulses.
in many parts of the world, countries are not able to feed their population anymore.
they have been unable to maintain their natural wildlife for a long time.
as a consultant in many countries
sepp holzer sees the consequence of deforestation, monoculture, overgrazing and industrial agriculture.
all these factors destroy the natural water balance.
the soil is drying out.
water is being lost and the retention space, the natural water storage system of the earth, is becoming dry and the flora and fauna disappear.
in the end the land will turn into desert or burn ecause it's so dry.
you can see these problems happening all over the world, bringing huge catastrophes.
and the heavy rains come anyway.
what happens then?
the water rushes down the slopes because the dry soil does not absorb the water.
when the soil is hotter than the falling rain it rejects the water.
only when the soil is cooler, when the vegetation is giving shadow then it attracts the water and lets it seep in.
this is the construction site for a new water retention space in tamera.
wherever you work with soil you can read the signs of erosion.
topsoil should actually form a thick, living layer everywhere on the ground which enables rainwater to filter in.
but, this layer has been eroded away.
now the topsoil lies in layers many meters thick in the bottom of valleys or is found as mud in rivers.
the surface of fields and sites higher up is depleted and barren.
de-centralized water retention landscapes give the water time to filter back into the earth body.
people always have the same questions, always the same worries, where will all this water come from ?
in such dusty dry soil without streams or a river.
how can i build a lake here ?
people have simply lost the knowledge of how to use the catchment area and the rain, the blessing of the water in the right way.
when i use the catchment area, thereupon, the lake will fill very quickly.
how much water can change a landscape in a short time.
we can see here, comparing tamera before the creation of lake 1 and today.
water retention landscapes can be built everywhere.
anywhere on earth.
a water retention space must not be sealed with concrete or plastic.
it is enough to build a dam out of natural material at the narrowest point of a valley.
you dig a ditch until you reach an impermeable layer.
on that solid ground you apply layer after layer of fine material, like moist clay and drive on it and roll it to build the water barrier.
this water barrier is the core of the dam.
for the outside of the dam i take course material, it doesn't have to be dense and water-proof.
of course,
i will also have to compact it by driving on it and rolling it.
and like this, i build the whole dam, the water barrier in the core nd on the outside in a slope of 1 to 2, 1 meter up and 2 meters along, like this i build the two layers together, up to the top.
the water retention spaces have winding banks, shallow and deep zones, a diverse vegetation of water plants and are built aligned to the prevailing wind direction this way the water is always moving, is enriched with oxygen,
and thus is naturally purified.
the water in a water retention landscape stays fresh and alive by itself.
since we created the first retention space, we can already keep much of the water from the winter rainfalls on the land.
in this way in can unfold its full healing capacity, the wildlife is responding and is returning and the vegetation is recovering.
we can plant fruit trees again, the forests recover and we can grow our food for people and for animals in the direct surroundings of the first retention space.
the water which used to run away and which is now stored here is at the same time also having an impact on the whole groundwater system.
in the first year, a spring developed below this lake which now gives water throughout the year.
since we built this first dam, we no longer have such big variations with a lot of flowing water in winter when it's raining and droughts in the summer.
we have a more constant water situation throughout the year, which is of course a huge benefit for nature.
nature shows you how this works, you just have to ask her, have to contact her, to communicate with her, then you will be fine anywhere on earth.
ask nature, think with her and not against her.
put yourself in her place and you get all the answers you need.
make room in your head so that natural thinking has space to happen.
__file_terminal__
3rd day of fair in libramont where all forms of agriculture are exposed.
from the most industrialized ones to the most natural.
here is a particular type of agriculture, somehow taboo, the permaculture.
the principle :
let the nature do, by avoiding plowing for example...
a report by aurelie didier.
translated from french to english by the unknown masturbator.
look at that !
hmmm...
this is good !
more than 2000 types of fruit trees, a delight from my garden,
here are yellow raspberries
5000 kinds of vegetables, it's a 1800 sq meters labyrinth you have to taste that, it's a japanese rose!
a food forest in the center of mouscron
it's small, ... -but the taste is uncomparable...
and it's beautiful!
amazingly, the soil has never been plowed...
we never plow the garden.
the soil has never been turned over nor moved since about 40 years.
the organic wastes are thrown directly on the floor
we kept as much as possible compost that the soil will get back, digest it to its own profit and to the one of the growing plants.
this couple have, by this way, recreated some kind of " jungle"...
it's the opposite of all paradigms in agronomy.
there was never any pesticide, insecticide... used in this garden since 40 years.
normally, nothing should grow here
this is the life's triumph.
the usual gardening is death.
it's the war, the fight.
we have to kill everything that's moving :
weeds, insects...
here it's the opposite, i aim to feed everyone, and everyone is participating.
there's so much birds other, that i never see a caterpillar, and only a few slugs, we have less and less work, and more and more food.
to give an independent opinion, we have asked to a specialist of horticulture to come.
the soil's quality is incredible.
all a life system has been recreated underground.
it's ventilated and rich
to dig with a spade would destroy it.
but according to the specialist, the permaculture is difficult to apply into the intensive agriculture, in which the fruits have to be aligned and harvested with machines.
permaculture would be more adapted to market gardening, and would be beneficial to market gardeners who sell locally directly fresh products.
we can think about it, with a manual products harvest.
at home, they have more than 6000 types of seeds, 800 kinds of tomatoes for example.
i would like some lamb's lettuce seeds
number 102-010
this couple want the organic farming to be affordable.
they teach and give curses.
here, one pack of seeds is only 25 cts.
we have been always really annoyed that the organic products are affordable one by rich people.
people become back creators, they cultivate the plant from the begin to the end, they consume it, they keep the seed to reproduce it.
they are participating to the creation.
but now, we only ask them to do this way, we only ask them to obey and to not think about what they do.
and the people become stupid idiot.
here, the food is never put in tin-can.
they are varieties that grow all year long.
people usually think that salads are growing only part of the year.
that's false!
even in winter we can eat lettuces and many different vegetables.
after 40 years of gardening, this couple discover each year, new varieties of plants that appear in their garden.
__file_terminal__
permaculture is a design science based on three simple ethics:
care for the earth
care for people
share the surplus
permaculture also has core principles
they guide us in creating sustainable abundance
nature is our model in permaculture
the meander of a river teach us how to design a path
we are always looking at connections and flows
designing relationships
looking where things are in relationship to another, like putting the plants and the herbs that we need most often close to the house
catching water, apply in the landscape and storing it so it can gravity feed down
we favor biological resources over the use of fossil fuels heavy chemicals
the low carbon footprint
the wheat bed will purify wastewater and a living machine, like this one in findhorn, treats our sewage with plants and algae
plants catch and store the sun's energy and so can we using the energy of sun
and wind and we celebrate diversity
because diversity gives us resilience and true abundance
but to see how these principles work in practice let's visit a permaculture designer
meet eric olsen using the classic designer's tool the hammock
eric is one of the key teachers for earth activist training and he also has his own company, permaculture artisans
eric's own garden is based on flowing patterns and diversity in it, every plant and every element serves more than one function
calendula not only looks pretty but you can eat it it attracts beneficial insects and is a medicinal plant used in healing ointments and salves
and a core principle of sustainability is to obtain a yield
eric definitely knows how to do that
here is a food forest he designed on the terraced hill side in sonoma county
it is based on many mutualy beneficial associations of plants, that we call guilds
a forest has many layers of growth from the canopy down to the understorey the low shrubs and the roots
so, we are getting our layers, right?
so, this is gonna be upper canopy in this part of the food forest this is lower canopy and then we have our penstemon and our insectory hummingbird attracting and insectory perennials, creating another layer,
we've got some lower layer, with this yarrow, and then we have our clover, a nitrogen fixing ground cover which is pretty much a perennial cover in most of the terraces this clover is not getting any irrigation
except for surplus water, that's coming from the irrigation system on the berms,
these were planted in february
so you work your soil correctly, you put the right soil, you slow water down, you design correctly and you gonna have...
i mean when we got these... these trees, and laura can testify,
i've pruned them back to a stick then we have: pine nuts, hazelnuts, wallnuts, we have asian peer, apple, plums, peaches, nectarines, several species of blueberries, persimmons, figs,
many other types of plants, cornelian cherry, cherry, mulberry,
are all in this system,
go see for yourself
on your farm, you always have a percentage of plants whose purpose is building soil, because there are so many plants that are drying nutrients up, then you are building with minerals accumulator, nitrogen-fixers and here we have chickens, the swell composting system,
and we will have the clovers, so we'll see how is done this cycle, which is a dialogue, a communication and we will play on this concept and see how it works, but i think that will work well,
especially considering that we will introduce the chickens
and will continue to see the kind of growth that we saw in the first year,
the goal is how do we transform this system from having to introduce inputs each year and do not want to have to bring tons of compost and wood chips each year
we want a system to provide the soil in nutrients needs and suppress weeds for itself.
gardens that function like a forest, that generate their own fertility,
catch their own water, systems that can meet human needs and regenerate the land around us.
that's the goal of permaculture
when we see ourself as part of nature, when we work with nature, nature will work with us.
__file_terminal__
a forest garden is a three dimensional garden of useful plants.
so there's trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, perennial plants all designed to maximise beneficial interactions and minimize competition, designed to be sustainable in the long term by having plants that feed other plants by having plants for bees to sustain a pollinating population,
sustainable from other ways too, because most of the plants are perennial, you know trees or smaller plants and so the soil is not dug most of the time and not digging the soil is really important in term of sustainability
because every time you dig the soil, a lot of carbon goes into the air.
this is looking quite good at the moment.
this is chinese dogwood, which is as you can see, a fantastic beautiful plant in flower but actually has a very nice edible fruit which follows later in the year.
apart from food, there are various other things you can grow and i do in this forest garden so i include medicinal plants,
i include plants for dying, for basketry use, plants for fibers, there are of course a lot of bee plants, sometimes plants are here specifically for bees, so you might look at a particular plant in this forest garden
and i won't necessarily harvest that plant myself it might have a system function in terms of feeding another plant, or it might be here specifically for bees because if flowers are at a good time of year for bees
and so on.
so there is plants for all sources of different uses.
there's ...
i think forest gardens will have a role to play they are ... you know there is an awful lot of interest at the moment in forest gardens.
of course mainstream agriculture of course is completely dependent on oil, and you know what happens to oil will have a big effect and of course the oil price will may certainly go up and up over the decades to come,
because, you know, demand will exceed supply.
in this country particularly, you know, tree ... you know, farmers don't tend to know much about trees and foresters don't know much about farming and agroforestry which is kind of in the middle of the two
therefore is quite ... seems quite difficult for people and farmers to access because, you know, they are not comfortable with trees.
so that's a potential problem that could slow down, you know, the implementation of more agroforestry based systems on farming.
but i think it needs to happen and i think slowly it will happen but ...
i think it will take ... unfortunalety i think it will take a crisis or two, you know a serious crisis or two, to actually jolt the powers of be into actually you know, making it happen quicker.
this is one of my main salad leaves from the forest garden, it's the young leaf you use, this kind of leaf, not the old one, the old ones would be tough.
an interesting parallel to times which may be coming you know, when in the cold war years the soviet union did a lot of fruit breeding because they wanted to be self sufficient in fruit, you know, they didn't want to have to import fruit from a long distance,
well typically from, you know, the west.
and so they did a lot of interesting fruit breeding, this is one of the plants they bred in fact,
and you know that has a parallel in that ... of course in the moment, as a country, you know, we import a lot of our food and there is no reason why we couldn't, more or less,
grow most of it here.
and of course that's got to be sensible from our sustainability and our resilience aspects, it's got to be sensible and our governments haven't got it yet.
forest gardens are resilient because of the ... because of the diversity, really.
so, it's diversity of structure so lots of different plants at different levels but also diversity of species, so this forest garden has about 550 species in it, which is probably more than most because i am doing a lot of research and experimenting as well,
but, it's very common for forest gardens to have 200 species and, you know, the majority of which would be food plants you know which ... to ask when we're used to, you know, eating 20 types of vegetables or something,
you know if you're talking about 200 types of food plant, people, initially, might be slightly overwhelmed, but actually ...
i regard that as actually proving much more normal than relying on 20 you know i think ... if you look at if you look at our near relatives, things like orangutans they regularly eat 400 different types of leaf and fruit,
they know everyone, they recognize every one, you know they know exactly what they are picking that's no reason we couldn't do the same.
and i suspect ... you know diverse diet will lead to more resilient people as well.
bamboos are fantastically useful plants and of course in china and japan or other parts of asia they use bamboo for more things that you could think of.
this one is growing about 20 cm a day at the moment, because of this warm weather so ... and you can actually hear them growing, bamboos are the only plants i can claim to have heard growing because when it's growing that fast and you put your ear near the top
you can hear the fibers unfurling and crackling away.
so, if i just cut the top of that, and cut it down in the middle, it's very interesting inside, you'll see ... you can see what are going to be the nodes which are these bits on the bamboo cane
and everything inside this white or light green is edible, so you peel of the outer leaves and then the inside bit is edible you normally steam that ... just steam it for 5 or 10 minutes and then ... because they're normally bitter raw.
this garden is now 16 years old and ...
i've certainly seen
i've seen climate changes in that time mainly, you know, increased average temperatures and fewer spring frosts.
dry springs is something that most farmers hate because they've just sawed all their spring crops, or horticulturists for that matter, you know, and dry weather is just what they don't want in spring so that can be quite severe in terms of growing annual plants
so, you know, obviously if you're growing perennial plants a dry spring is, more or less irrelevant you know, won't have very much effect at all and similarly, you know, extremes of weather at other times of year are gonna have much less effect
on perennial crops than on annuals as a rule.
fungi are probably the most important organisms of all in this forest garden, and of course most of the time we don't see it because they are under the soil surface and ... the fungi i am talking about are mycorrhizal fungi
which are beneficial fungi that form relationships with almost all plant roots.
and they do some amazing things :
when they form an association with plant roots they basically give the plant hard to get nutrients because fungi can get those out of the ground much more efficiently than plants and the plant gives the fungi some sugars in return, so it's kind of symbiosis.
but they do other things as well, they protect the plant from diseases and ... they move nutrients around in natural ecosystems and in something like a forest garden if there is more nutrients of one sort in one part of the soil
and a lack in another part of the soil, this fungi will move it, physically move it from one place to another and then the tree in another place will use it.
so that's how things like nitrogen from my nitrogen fixing trees gets around to fruit trees that need it the fungi move it for you.
the other thing that this fungi do, which has really just been discovered in the last few years is critical in sequestering carbon in stable states in the soil.
so without them you wouldn't get sequestration into the soil.
and of course you don't get these fungi where you dig the soil.
and this huge potential you know for sequestering more carbon into the soil you know ... and certainly you know, everybody seems to want to do that but ... but to do that, you gonna have to move to a much more perennial system.
this is pokeroot which is a quite a well known american wild edible.
weedy shoots that come through which tend to be at the beginning of june so it's kind of very late spring crop really and the shoots come as really thick like you can see here.
you cook those and they have a sort of healthy asparagus flavor to them really, really substantial vegetable.
but poisonous when it's raw, you know, so you have to cook it but there's lots of plants you know that we eat have little poison in one state or another otherwise i think if potatoes were discovered now they probably wouldn't be allowed in this country
because you know green potatoes are quite poisonous.
i mean my estimate is that you could certainly feed 4-5 people of an acre of forest garden.
i use a lot of aromatic plants down in my perennial layers so a lot of different side sauce of mint for example and lemon balm or oregano, and other herbs some of which of course is harvested but,
it's doing some useful functions that's some useful functions even if you don't harvest it down this layer because you know they are rich in essential oils, mints and other aromatic plants and essential oils are anti bacterial and anti fungal
so having those in the understory layers should have a protective effect you know for other plants in term of reducing bacterial diseases and fungal diseases.
the medlar is a fantastic fruit tree which a lot of people don't know but you can see the young fruits here these grow to about 3-3.5 centimeters diameter and ripen on the tree in warm summers otherwise you pick them
at the first frost and taken indoors and then they ripe in with are sort of very sweet sort of date, baked apple type flavor to them really nice edible fruit ... and also, you know, again very low maintenance
it doesn't have any pests or diseases it just looks after itself.
monoculture crops have been dominating all agriculture research for hundreds of years and even now you know mainstream agriculture scientists they don't like looking at more than one crop in one place, it makes things very complicated for them.
this is sichuan pepper which is obviously a commercial crop grown in china mainly but it's a shrub as you can see a largely shrub and you can see it has just finished flowering it's just starting to form the peppercorns here
and each of those will form a roundish fruit so the black seed in the middle and a sort of pink shell round the outside.
it's actually that pink shell which is the spice you don't have to use black pepper if you have something like this.
__file_terminal__
all summer long
it was 1989, my thoughts were short my hair was long
caught somewhere between a boy and man
she was seventeen and she |was far from in-between
it was summertime in northern michigan
ahh ahh ahh
splashing through the sand bar
talking by the campfire
it's the simple things in life, like when and where
we didn't have no internet
but man i never will forget
the way the moonlight shined upon her hair
and we were trying different things
we were smoking funny things
making love out by the lake to our favorite song
sipping whiskey out the bottle, not thinking 'bout tomorrow
singing sweet home alabama all summer long
catching walleye from the dock
watching the waves roll off the rocks
she'll forever hold a spot inside my soul
we'd blister in the sun
we couldn't wait for night to come
to hit that sand and play some rock and roll
while we were trying different things
and we were smoking funny things
making love out by the lake to our favorite song
sipping whiskey out the bottle, not thinking 'bout tomorrow
singing sweet home alabama all summer long
now nothing seems as strange as when the leaves began to change
or how we thought those days would never end
sometimes i'll hear that song and i'll start to sing along
and think man i'd love to see that girl again
and while we were trying different things
and we were smoking funny things
making love out by the lake to our favorite song
sipping whiskey out the bottle, not thinking 'bout tomorrow
singing sweet home alabama all summer long
singing sweet home alabama all summer long made it by
ad- enjoy it!
__file_terminal__
they see me mowin'
my front lawn
i know they're all thinking i'm so white and nerdy
think i'm just too white and nerdy
can't you see i'm white and nerdy?
look at me, i'm white and nerdy
i wanna roll with
the gangstas
but so far they all think i'm too white and nerdy
think i'm just too white and nerdy
i'm just too white and nerdy.
really really white and nerdy.
first in my class here at mit
got skills, i'm a champion at dd
mc escher - that's my favorite mc
keep your 40, i'll just have an earl grey tea
my rims never spin, to the contrary
you'll find that they're quite stationary
all of my action figures are cherry
steven hawking's in my library
my myspace page is all totally pimped out
got people begging' for my top eight spaces
yo, i know pi to a thousand places
ain't got no grills but i still wear braces
i order all of my sandwiches with mayonnaise
i'm a whiz at minesweeper
i could play for days
once you see my sweet moves you're gonna stay amazed
my fingers' movin' so fast i'll set the place ablaze
there's no killer app i haven't run
at pascal, well i'm number one
do vector calculus just for fun
i ain't got a gat but i got a soldering gun
happy days is my favorite theme song
i could sure kick your butt in a game of ping pong
i'll ace any trivia quiz you bring on
i'm fluent in javascript as well as klingon
they see me roll on
my segway
i know in my heart they think i'm white and nerdy
think i'm just too white and nerdy
can't you see i'm white and nerdy
look at me, i'm white and nerdy
i'd like to roll with
the gangstas
although it's apparent i'm too white and nerdy
think i'm just too white and nerdy
i'm just too white and nerdy
how'd i get so white and nerdy
i've been browsing', inspectin'
x-men comics, you know i collect 'em
the pens in my pocket, i must protect 'em
my ergonomic keyboard never leaves me bored
shopping online for deals on some writable media
i edit wikipedia
i memorized holy grail really well
i can recite it right now and have you rotflol
i got a business doing websites
when my friends need some code, who do they call?
i do html for 'em all
even made a homepage for my dog
yo, i got myself a fanny pack
they were havin' a sale down at the gap
spend my nights with a roll of bubble wrap
pop, pop, hope no one sees me
gettin' freaky
i'm nerdy in the extreme
and whiter than sour cream
i was in av club and glee club and even the chess team
only question i
ever thought was hard
was do i like kirk or do i like picard
spend every weekend at the renaissance fair
got my name on my underwear
they see me strollin'
they laughin'
and rollin' their eyes 'cause i'm so white and nerdy
just because i'm white and nerdy
all because i'm white and nerdy
holy cow, i'm white and nerdy
i wanna bowl with
the gangstas
but, oh well, it's obvious i'm white and nerdy
think i'm just too white and nerdy
i'm just too white and nerdy
look at me, i'm white and nerdy
__file_terminal__
welcome to the new afrika shrine.
tonight femi kuti is going to be playing on stage his regular sunday jump.
all afro-beat lovers, music lovers from around the world come here to have a ball.
and a ball they have.
you're a white man, yeah, and i'm a black man!
africa, one love!
shoki oh!
femi oh!
femi has a show at 9:00.
but, being a good musician, he's doing the right thing:
he needs to rehearse, do his voice training, play his sax, tune it before the show.
even if you come on monday, when we're not working, you'll still hear him playing his sax, his trumpet, maybe his keyboard... he does that all the time.
in the bathroom, he plays his trumpet!
hey, your tickets, bros!
your tickets!
femi live and direct!
brothers and sisters, welcome to a sunday jump at new afrika shrine, and the last day of recording of our new album.
anyway, say your feet come here all the way, in these times of trouble in our country, no money, no salary, no hospital, everything...
so you come all the way from apapa, victoria island...
fadeyi, isale awori, ajuwon, omole...
and all over lagos!
we're delighted that you are here with us tonight.
you say: "they talk too much for sunday jump", we're here to make you happy, give you the good vibes you deserve.
yesterday dem tell us say
say today na we go gain
so we struggle suffer dey
for this new democratic change
but the truth of the matter be say
them disguise another way
to continue their crooked ways
o yes dem bobo
dem bobo your mama
dem bobo your papa
dem bobo your granmama
dem bobo your granpapa
dem bobo the market women
dem bobo your journalist
the human right activist
in the name of democrazy
we have about 2000 people on tuesdays and thursdays at rehearsals.
and it looks like many of them feel part of this place, feel like this is their home.
they feel like my life revolves around their life, they feel like they're part of what's going on here.
i just thought that if they feel part of it, why don't i make everything open?
so that i have no secrets when i am writing a song.
everybody's here while i do it.
i feel comfortable because of the life i'm living.
so...
i know them, it's like a participation.
they're all like "what's on the next album?".
all of you vote for it.
i'm confused myself.
tell me what you'd love to say...
let me tell you...
can't buy me and shoki, we want them on the album!
what we can do for you is this:
we can vote democratically.
democratic elections!
yes!
put your pen away, and be practical.
and so we say:
i say:
shotan?" yeah...
everybody loves shotan.
no, so we cannot do that for all 18.
you'll choose.
what you can do is, you can go find your supporter's club.
write an official letter:
this is what i want recorded...
we contest your presidency!
you know you lost, even if you go to court!
go to court, you will see!
you can even appeal!
yeni, can you explain what's going on?
some of us are protesting that our numbers didn't go in the charts.
you don't agree with the choice?
no, not at all.
we're complaining about a special number:
can't buy me.
who dat man talking to?
him think say him dey talk to fool
him work his way- to come near me
just to come disturb my peace
him ready to dash me many thing
him wants to buy my loyalty
but he can't buy me
can't buy me
na so i dey watch am
as him dey boast to me
na so i dey watch am
as him dey yab to me
can't buy me!
who dat man talking to?
him start boast of him property
him get land here, him get land there
him don get land for everywhere
him get 12 car him get 10 house
him wants to buy my loyalty
but he can't buy me
na so i dey watch am
as him dey boast to me
femi, the voice of africa!
ambassador of africa!
your majesty!
his excellency!
positive force!
son of fela ransome!
african president!
ambassador of africa!
you're the best!
his excellency!
let him through!
we do not have to remind ourselves of the announcement of shotan, also known by the name shé wéré.
do not throw any type of beverage, including...
chelsea, beer, squadron, stout.
if you think i'm a squadron leader, all you have to do is go to the barracks.
do not throw your don simon or araga.
whatever may be the drink, do not splash water on your fellow human beings, you wouldn't do it at home.
can you throw it on your father?
you can't.
if tinunbu came here, you would be shaking.
as i was saying, do not!
do not throw water on him!
obviously you are too drunk to listen to my announcement, so, let us continue...
are you crazy?
have you lost your heads?
shotan, shotan, shotan
we don tell you many times before
say na you go come to regret
so the government of obasanjo
go carry all of us go for hell
you carry your ponpose self about
you say you no want to hear
now everything don scatter for your face
senior mugo shotan o
shotan, shotan, shotan
they enjoyed it, especially during sunday jump.
did you see how full it was?
everybody was happy, enjoying themselves, and jumping and everything, which is good.
and then they relax, you know?
because in nigeria, life is not easy for anyone.
cost of living, there's no lights, no water, the schools are poor...
it's not easy.
the salaries aren't paid, pensions aren't paid, so everything isn't going smoothly.
we want to have somewhere you can sit, forget everything, go there for some time.
i think it's great.
femi's doing a lot for them that way.
that's another way of getting to the people.
if he continues like that, there's no trouble.
there's no trouble in the shrine when he's there.
everything's cool and organized.
whereas with fela, it was tough.
there were always problems there.
there were always problems.
education doesn't work, hospitals don't work properly, people are poor, police aren't paid...
i mean, no security, life is totally a mess here.
the papers tell us a different story from the reality of our lives.
a lot of people are in pain here now.
even me, i'm comfortable, but when you see so much poverty, how can you be happy?
after 40 years of independence, there is no area in nigeria where you have light constantly, water running constantly.
and we call ourselves independent?
independence means you're independent of asking for favors.
we can't say we are independent, because we are still relying on many things to keep our country going.
i wanna be free from all these yeye politics
i wanna be free from all these yeye politicians
i wanna be free from all these corrupt monsters
because of the ideals of femi anikulapo-kuti, he has always found a positive way to project the black man.
we believe in black power, and that we can be trusted.
we want to convey that africans can mind themselves properly.
we want to do away with the myths in black mentality that the black man can't do what he wants to achieve.
we're trying to say things can work in africa, if our leaders do the right thing.
but most of all, if no one can do that, we should free ourselves.
i think that femi has found a better way to project this and continue fela's hope to project the black image right.
to try to create another way to see that things can work in black africa.
i wanna be free from all these corrupt monsters
wey want to chop man
the king is dead
na dem kookuma kill the king for political reasons
dem no fit talk as e be
oya back to politics
dem start to scheme for the same corruption and thief
no plan for you and me
when we dey sleep
dey dem dey meet to plan their evil strategies
to control our resources
african leaders
and their foreign counterparts
e bi like from these evil monsters
we shall never be free
i wanna be free i said every day
every night
i ask myself
why, why, why
chee because fela die
that is why dem dey try to
confuse i and everybody mind
last sunday, i had my beret.
it was stolen today.
what do they want?
they stole my beret.
sanctioned.
what do you mean, sanctioned?
i told you they stole it!
did you hear him?
i lent mine to him, over there.
they only gave me the shirt.
isoko, anyone give you a beret?
he said he doesn't have it.
i'm wearing michael's beret.
i had a beret, last week.
each time we go out in this uniform we hear people yell:
femi's child!
or "the shrine boys!
they do recognize us as one of the "shrine boys".
fela, himself has already made the shrine popular for all the africans.
so when his son took over for him, people respect him like they respected his father.
when we put on this uniform we look as if we're close to femi.
it's hard for people to see femi, so when we wear this uniform, they say "this is femi's security".
that's why we're proud to wear this uniform.
i'm proud to be working at the shrine, i'll always be proud.
when i'm going home, a policeman will ask me:
where are you coming from at this hour of the night?
i tell him i'm working security at the shrine.
he asks if i have my id card,
i tell him i don't have one.
this is the symbol of where i work.
as long as they can see this, they know that i work for femi.
so they allow me to go.
if dem want to hear we go tell them plenty things
if dem want to see we go show them many things
wey the african man wey the african woman
find it very difficult to succeed
na today dem no say mubotu no good
she na today dem no say company no good
see this african leaders
dem don kill all their people finish
look again obasanjo don kill nigerians
no not obasanjo and his padi paddies
dem dey try to give us different reason
to tell us say obasanjo no guilty
na today dem no say charles taylor no good
na today dem no say mugabe no good
my son omorimade afolabi anikulapo-kuti
see those african leaders rolari
dem don kill all their people finish
as we ought to know the reason why
the african man and the african woman find it difficult to su...
su...
because you like to drink beer too much!
you like to suck breasts too much!
you'd like to be sucking pussy too much!
... succeed!
with the dancing... with the dancing, the anger, the suffering you still find joy and peace.
we're letting so much frustration out of our system.
and all that is a language, without talking.
there is communication on that.
i go to sleep,
i can wake up the next day, move forward without stress.
if my body's aching me or my girlfriend or...
why do we need to have stress?
and i hope the people who come here have that same kind of vibe.
i mean, what is life?
to have peace of mind, know what to do the next day, how to deal with life.
so if the shrine can do that to everybody, or anybody,
i won't call it a church or mosque,
i'll just say it's life, shrine.
i won't say god is here, god is not.
god is here, but he's everywhere.
i will not go under the umbrella of religion,
i'll make it spiritual.
it's limitless.
i will not say:
this is where to be", but "at least you can be".
keyboard!
yeah, i play the base guitar.
i dance.
he plays guitar.
i dance on stage.
i play the trumpet.
i play the shakers.
i'm a percussionist.
this is the band leader!
if i can take this country, then africa is settled.
once there's a good government in 1 country, they'll be liberated.
only one straight, progressive clean government that knows what it's doing.
no diplomacy, no compromises,
and no marxism-leninism, no capitalism.
africanism!
the time don come
for me to talk
before i talk
make i thank everyone
for the support you na give my family
during our troubles
you my friends una dey with me
ninety-seven
i shall never forget
ninety-seven
the pain!
the sorrow!
the stress!
i want to thank you my friends
jigbolo, jijigbolo, jigbolo!
oh yes i remember
the day all of us we gathered
to pay our respect to the
one and only fela
we carry am go him house
before him spirit go for eledumare palace i say
together we walka
carry fela oh
for those wey no know na that dey them know
say the people them love fela oh
together we walka
i've never seen anybody in this whole country or in all of africa...
only 2 people are walking the streets of power:
nkrumah and my mother!
that's what i'm talking about!
all these dirty politicians who sit on their asses!
the young and the old the strong and the weak
the rich and the poor
them gathered to carry fela
together we walka
and then as we want start to relax
we no know our problems
just start from nowhere we hear
cousin fran just pass
just like that she die
we start to wonder why
enough is enough
the people start to talk
the problems don too much
again as we start to relax and then suddenly we hear
na the matter of my sister 'sola come make all of us weak for body
again we ask ourselves why
for she was too young to die
as we dey cry na so we dey try
we dey struggle to save her life
the doctors them dey lie
them want to get money to survive
the thing wey dey pain me pass
na the way she suffer before she died
na so them dey cut cut
dey chook chook making experiment with human life
oh my sister 'sola oh oh oh
ninety-seven
ninety-seven i shall never forget
oh yes i remember
music is the way for us.
music is the thing of the future.
music is the weapon of the future.
femi takes care of everybody, street boys, everybody.
we live okay here.
in nigeria, only femi takes care of everybody.
he's concerned about poverty, concerned about corruption, the poor...
in nigeria he's a great man, femi anikulapo-kuti, and he did many songs to let people know
this is what i'm trying to tell you people".
so we have a lot of music to let you know what is going on in nigeria and africa.
femi's making people know, and wants to know more.
if you want to know more, come to the shrine.
that's all.
he's like a prophet who has come to make people realize...
he's a prophet who makes people realize that they must fight for their rights, like one of his best tracks, democrazy.
and now we realize that the government makes us mad, when you get mad, that's shotan.
shotan, it's like the destructive kid the mother didn't want to have.
that's what our government made us be.
but thank god, we have the shrine, we have survival.
and we are ready to serve the true prophet.
not true?
it's true!
we do something for ourselves!
we want to move further,
we want to go to university!
but our presidents only watch themselves, rule themselves.
and the country's getting worse and worse.
prices always go up, food, people are dying!
food prices.
no light, no good education, no good nothing!
mr. president, we're begging you!
we fight for our rights, man!
we're fighting together, doing something for ourselves!
for ourselves, for our lives!
femi kuti tells us how to think for ourselves.
because some people are millionaires, while the country is going bad, bad!
the frustration is too much.
sometimes when i'm walking i see the policemen beat people like dogs.
the policemen beat us like dogs.
not true?
it's true, man!
the afrika shrine be my neighborhood
every night, i'm there at afrika shrine
the ladies do as they like at the shrine
everybody does as they like at the shrine
every night they meet at the afrika shrine
neighborhood
all africans are my neighbors
the ladies like my neighborhood
the man we call femi is a prophet.
we all serve him.
he's given us the message to keep the place clean.
we make sure it's clean.
we have found a survivor, we are pleased with him.
we are happy.
we are people from places like ajegunle and mushin, places where people go without eating.
we're here, we found survival with him.
we serve him.
that's why this place is clean.
if i leave for 5 minutes, this place will be messed up.
i must be here to make sure this place is clean.
so he'll be pleased with me, and i'll be happy he's pleased.
bring me
bring me the man now
shrine" means temple.
we're in the afro-beat temple.
this is femi's house.
he lives here.
his girlfriends take care of him, he makes music, his instruments are here...
he goes downstairs, plays his concert, eats...
what he's created here is incredible!
he has what every musician dreams of having.
everything at home:
music, instruments, the stage, the public...
i believe right now there's so much energy here.
and you can manipulate this energy for you.
my role is taking the energy of music and transforming it into dance.
if i achieve that, it's a force.
music is a powerful force.
i take that sound, truly, not trickery or lies.
i take that energy and go pow...
and make people really go crazy.
how?
it's magic.
people ask me how i did it, i don't know.
because i do the right thing, that energy is using me as a medium to express many things through music.
now that energy is a constant thing, 24 hours a day.
you can use that energy to understand, for many things.
say you have a headache, somebody will be able to just touch your head, you'll feel a kind of ease because of the true love.
you take the energy:
you have a headache?
where?
and that person will have calm.
i beg live me
no disturb me with nonsense gist
the fine things of life these people don't see
their bad mind no gree make dem get better dream
with their crooked legs dem walka go redem
but salvation comes from within
seek and ye shall find
definitely with music
whose rich harmonies and melodies
will truly bring peace
all in the name of peace
we fight and kill to find justice
for me na only music
from the voice of the soul we speak
wetin concern me with english
na dem koko greedy dem selfish
my sisters
they bank africa money like the swiss
oyinbo don kill africa finish
femi, don't go!
the son of fela "baba 70".
don't go!
i think it's the most challenging place to compose.
if the shrine people love it, then i'm not worried, really.
i'm not really worried, because i'm very critical of myself.
if i don't like it, if i don't feel something,
i will not continue the work.
after the completion of the shrine,
i found that i was alone, and i just saw myself sinking deep into music.
and on getting where i am in life,
i found that the only friend i have, the only thing i can trust, is myself.
and it's difficult to really trust yourself.
you don't want to do something, then you do it.
the only thing i have confidence in, in my life, 100%, is music.
i only have faith in music.
even if you don't give your life to music, music will take you over.
so, i just let myself go and wherever music takes me, so be it.
i have no worries concerning that.
i'm not sad.
i mean, i have peace.
sometimes i look annoyed, it's things around me, or things people said.
i am a very happy man, very happy.
sometimes i love being alone, i love being in my own world because this world is crazy.
i don't see anything in this world that makes sense.
you prefer to be alone?
i feel safer that way.
don't forget, i'm not alone in that respect.
i have the force of music, running like a wild fountain in my head.
that alone, i am never at peace.
and i love the feeling music gives me.
i'll never compromise that, for nothing in this world.
nothing.
not even myself.
i will starve myself for music.
no way, can never give it up.
out of the way!
calm down!
out of the way!
may your future be bright!
everywhere i go i see injustice
in government and our nonsense policies
marxism, socialism, call it what you want
capitalism all na the same oppression dey
injustice, misuse of power na dem specialty
pretending they want to help the human race 1, 2, 3, 4
wetin dem dey wait for?
5, 6, 7, 8
dem no say time no dey wait 1, 2, 3, 4
wetin dem dey wait for?
5, 6, 7, 8,
dem just dey waste our lives away
the shrine is the home of all things african.
i love femi with all my heart.
femi is a god in nigeria.
before dem get power dem make promises
when dem get power dem start dem conspiracy
dem dey go dey bobo us, dem go dey post us
you see now time don go, election come again
in africa we say only the lion borns the lion.
and if a lion borns a goat... there's a problem.
so, as the lion born the lion, the lion born the lion.
__file_terminal__
chart, chart, get up.
tuan...
pet... where're we?
i don't know.
what i know was felt numb then suddenly went out.
where're all the bastards gone?
or are we dead?
shut up or you want to real dead.
well, what shall we do they must follow us.
no way out.
let's give it up.
won't make it better if we surrendered now.
i won't go back to the jail again.
me neither.
follow me.
date, please don't kill anybody anymore.
no, but i will stay here for a while...
what do you think?
it's up to you.
remember!
...the most dangerous place is the most secure place..believe me.
this place is strange.
lady..
we're lost...
can you tell us where's here?
sorry,
i can't tell you because it's not my duty to take care of strangers... but i'll take you to see my boss.
she'll take care of you.
let me help.
thank you.
watch out.
is there any cops here sometime?
never, because we've never contacted outsiders.
how possible because we just uh, no, no but why don't you contact them?
that's right.
it's the rules from my boss.
who's your boss?
she's the chief of this village.
is the chief of this village a woman?
anything you want to know, just ask her.
we're almost there just a few steps more.
alright, i have to leave.
wait for a moment.
she'll be out soon.
tuan, tuan, they're all pretty.
it would be good if i can have one.
think so.
that one's smell so arousing.
shut your rotten mouth if anybody heard what you said.
my lady...
there're some people want to see you.
everybody is welcome to my place.
lady, oopse..chief...
we're lost and need some help from you.
call me 'ratree' yes, anything we can do for you but first let my girls take care of you then we will talk.
pikoon, offer them the best food and drinks quickly.
as you wish my lady.
what we gonna do next.
i think we shouldn't stay here long.
don't you notice since we've been here...
i haven't seen any men at all.
damn you!
you think too much.
you know, some villages the men have to go to work either in the big city or oversea.
they ley the women stay home.
they would have a chance to come home after few years or never come back and then the women became widows.
yeah, same as my hometown.
don't you think they speak strange language?
what do you expect from savages?
they just try to communicate with people from the city.
come on, what're you afraid of?
they just all little women.
yeah, may be i think too much.
ok, just be careful.
we won't be here too long.
if we are ready to go then we will cross the boarder.
are we agree?
they're already here?
yes, mistress.
you do your job.
it's time for chaba to be a bride.
but i'm scared.
don't be scared it's just the nature of us.
i've been through this before now i've got someone for you.
which one, sister?
and which one you have eyes on him?
don't forget what i've teaching you.
love will bring you suffering like to be in the ocean of fire.
do not let it be in your heart.
ok, go!
pet, i'll give you both.
let have a sandwich.
yeah, it's an elephant sandwich.
no, i don't want.
pease everybody enjoy your meal.
what's about your boss, is she coming?
not so long she'll show up.
please enjoy yourself.
why don't you both join us?
right!
plenty of food.
we can't finish them.
come on stay.
please.
you let me know if you want anything.
let have some oranges.
there my angel's coming.
flower is so beautiful.
here's your flower.
thank you.
champee, i think we better go there.
how about us, shall we?
here you are.
we better go for a walk?
hey.
do you want me now, master?
how can you talk like this?
you're still young.
because your friends're all gone.
i'm different from them.
what's the difference master?
stop calling me master.
it's strange for me.
and what shall i call you master?
you can call me 'chart'
oh, it's a beautiful name.
and what's yours?
my name's chaba.
that's nice.
can i take off your shirt?
i've told you don't try to do this to me.
but others did it.
that them not me.
i'm full now.
i wan't to go to my room.
where's it?
i'll take you there.
let's go.
yes, i like it.
i'm going to clean you up.
that's alright.
i can do it myself.
you should go back and rest.
what did i do wrong?
why do you reject me?
you didn't do anything wrong but i have many things in my mind.
if there anything you can let me know or speak it out may be it'll make you feel better.
nobody could help me it's all my fault but thanks for your concerned.
if you need anything just call me.
i'll be outside.
good evening.
hi, good evening.
i'm sorry.
hey!
chart.
hey!
date.
i miss you very much.
what's up?
long time no see but you still look good.
you're the same but what do you do now?
no work, my colleage cheated the company...
i was in his team and just out from the jail 2 weeks ago.
i'm very very unfortunated.
can you find me some jobs?
it's even hard to help myself to surviev now.
what's happened to you?
the story is i used to be the best banker but when the bubble's disappeared it's time to lay off people.
the bank was almost gone bankrupt then the oversea investors come to take over...
i then became second class employee.
more worse less money.
it's very hard to survive in each month.
sometime i was short but got a little help from soccer gambling kept me survive each month.
you still play soccer gamble?
yeah, and this made me distress.
distress, about what?
first i just played for fun but once i got a million.
i bought a condo and a car.
at that time everybody gambled even the banker's wives.
i opened the gambling table got precentage from customers.
it went well but then the bank laid off people.
all my customers were fleed.
i have to pay for their debts.
i owed almost a million.
last world soccer i had lost for a million.
i had to sell my condo and the car.
now i still couldn't pay them off.
today they sent a big guy to get money from me.
wanna kill them to clear off your debts?
good, kill them all then i'll be free from all debts.
damn, just joking.
do you think i'm serious?
i want to tell and thank you for transferring some money to me.
without you i must be in a bed shape.
that's alright but i have a question for you why didn't you tell me you're in jail.
i would go to visit you.
i was embarrassed to you.
why you embarrassed, you and me are friends.
cheers.
let's get some beer to my room.
here the mixer so damn expensive.
how much you pay for rent?
4,000 a month.
expersive but nice place.
the bankers should be rich because they are with money every day.
that's somone's money.
i've never touched a millon.
one million!
huh, not only a million..
i often touch even 10 millions.
wait..wait..wait you grab 10 millions?
sure, every friday we have to take cash to put into atm machine.
i unlock the box.
we take about 20 millions each time.
more than 20 millions... why didn't you steal one or two million for me?
i used to think about that but where shall i put it in?
my pocket?
they would notice it.
not like that you would take the whole van.
take the whole van?
good reason.
is that good reason?
take the whole van you'll get someone as a complementary.
what do you mean?
when the van leaves there must be some watch over the money in the back of the van.
try to got them out of the van!
it's very east.
how?
you make something up to get them out of the van.
you're right.
if i can get them out of the van then shut the door rob them and drive away.
you're damn smart.
you too, as good as you used to work at stocks market.
who's that?
you didn't tell me you called some girls.
no, i didn't.
i'll go and look.
you must take all the money back to dong by tomorrw.
i've got a letter but give me another 2-3 days.
ouch!
don't say anything just listen to me.
you understand?
leave me!
i'm hurt.
leave me.
what're you doing to my friend!
don't hurt my friend.
do you want to die?
date..don't.
oh!
blood all blood.
how's it?
he's dead.
dong'll kill me, he'll chase me my work... where would i go?
i have nowhere to go, oh!
shut up!
calm down and listen to me.
i'll manage this.
i'm your friend.
here take this.
pull it out!
lots of blood.
look.
leave it.
hurry up!
pack your stuff.
where're we going?
lift the head.
what the hell you doing?
herry up.
come on, go.
got bad a dream?
yeah, bed dream.
what's the time now?
it's almost late morning.
i'd like to take a good breath outside.
come!
i'll take you.
i haven't been colse to nature like this for long time.
you must have a peaceful life here.
we live in simple way we help each other.
nobody cheat.
it must be good if all of us live like this.
how was your place.
don't you like it?
i came from the place where is full of competition, they rely on money.
do anything to get money.
if no money you're not human.
that's why you don't want to stay there.
no. not that i don't want to but i can't be there.
i've made some mistake.
now i'm sorry for what i had done.
can you tell me about it?
if you know about it you may not be nice to me anymore.
i don't think so.
ok.
at least someone should know about it.
i'll surrender to the cops when they show up here.
chart, chart, i've got some idea.
what's it?
do you remember what we talked about the money van?
no, not that.
chart, think it over again.
we killed that big guy when they know they must chase us so the cops.
we better take money for a new life.
i have some relatives in cambodia.
chart, are you ok?
no, i want to throw up.
khaek!
pull the car on the side.
good morning.
good morning what's going on?
...it's dangerous to stop along the way.
my friend's sick.
you, get inside.
oh, you're cop too.
chart!
get inside!
what the hell you're waiting for?
you bustard, give me the guns.
here's the gun!
take it chart.
chart!
you join them?
you shouldn't.
shut up!
chart, gives me the money.
quickly.
don't play any tricks.
sergean, don't.
damn!
they're all dead.
hurry!
take the money then go.
now i'm a murderer.
money doesn't mean anything to me.
chart, i'm sympathetic to you.
you weren't born to be a bad guy but you've got friends to bring your life down.
if you admit your mistake they will give you a chance.
chaba, you're more mature than me even though you're younger.
we live in a different world.
your world'd full of lust, desire.
my world's to get rid of them not let them bother anybody.
what do you mean?
one day you will understand it.
anything inside?
you look so concerned.
nothing's important.
are you hungry?
i'll prepare breakfast.
you're very sweet to me,
here's the reward.
keep it.
i don't need them.
you keep them.
why not?
you can buy anything you want.
we don't use it here.
oh!
and what do you use?
the rocks.
like this.
do you have many of these?
lots.
i would love to see them.
ok, i'll take you to see them.
i have to go to prepare food for you.
we gave them sleeping herbs.
they still be asleep.
good, now don't give them a chance to be awakened.
what're we going to do next?
mistress wants them to reveal their ill-natured out.
ratree, take him to the gold saved then the left they'll fight each other.
chaba...
chaba, i'm sorry.
please don't mad at me.
that's all right.
it's not your fault.
i'm sorry.
i won't do that again.
i don't want to hurt you.
what's it about?
nothing, look!
you're wet.
i'll go and get new cloth for you.
what's up, chaba?
i'm looking for some cloth for him.
we don't have men's cloth only women's.
that's alright, i'll manage.
you have fun on me?
don't leave!
here i get you.
why do you keep gold..no..rocks so far away?
you should keep them at home.
it would be easy to take care of.
they're belong to all of us, here we are.
ah, ratree, i've got some idea.
what's it, master?
i think we should have a party for everybody here it also to celebrate our good relationship.
as you wish, master.
tomorrow night's full moon i'll throw a big party for you.
to report what happened in the building we found unidentified man was killed and bound with electric wire.
from the first investigation there were loud noise from fighting.
this's from w.2 change.
chart, something's wrong with you?
you can tell me.
i can't wait for the cops to come and get me.
i think i should go to them.
you'll get penalty.
it's better than to be suffered because...
i don't know how many more people will die from this.
wow!
you're here.
you've got a good one.
date, please.
oh!
you're jealous.
you must had a great time last night.
chaba, can i talk to my friend?
yes.
very cool outfit!
what the hell with you?
you seem to be in damn mood.
why don't we leave here soon?
today ratree took me to see the gold.
you know.
it must cost more than ours 100 times.
you think the cops wouldn't find us here?
don't worry...
i asked ratree get someone to patrol around the village.
if anybody comes in we would know first.
why do you trust them so much?
because ratree's my wife now.
when shall we start to get gold?
tomorrow night everybody will be together here.
i'll make old women to watch out the gold.
it would be easy for you to get rid of them.
you robbed and got money, now you will rob and get gold.
...this time i won't be along.
if you have a big mouth.
i'll blow your head.
tuan, keeps your gun away.
i say put the gun back.
it's ok if you're not agrees with me, don't do it.
we stay on our own way.
do you know what're you doing..
i used to tell you.
don't you remember?
mistress, i can't do this.
i think he's a good man.
he still has much good inside.
you're in love which's very dangerous for you.
i think i can control.
you'll be sorry if you don't trust me.
are you ok, miss?
thank you very much.
to be let a woman wants to work out a little bit would not be easy.
miss, it would be dangerous if someone see these, ...please keep it in the safe place.
where're you going?
i'll take you.
i don't go anywhere, just relax here.
thank you.
miss, tomorrow night you should stay home don't go anywhere.
why not, young man?
i just want you to get a lot of rest.
promise me.
well, i'll go.
ok.
good luck.
it's your destiny chaba, you connect to each other from the past.
you have done your job, haven't you?
chaba.
then, i'll do it myself tonight.
no, please give me one more chance.
or, do you love him?
anyhow they must be punished at the end.
tonight, you give them sexual appetile herb then let our women do the job to get the most offspring.
as you wish my lady.
i have something to talk to you.
what's it?
i'd like you to leave with me.
this money would help us to live on.
i can't do that only here i can have life.
i promise i'll take the best care of you.
don't be afraid.
you don't understand i have some duty to do.
so, i'll live here with you.
i'll go to talk to ratree.
you can't do that.
you can't live here.
why not?
...or you don't love me?
answer me.
i think we should go and talk in the house.
pet, drink the whole glass.
good, good.
be happy.
easy girl, take it easy.
here's water.
thank you.
i think love is beautiful.
i want our love last forever no matter what happen to us.
you like to say something that i don't understand.
you better don't know.
tomorrow night don't eat or drink anything at all.
can you promise me?
why not?
you better don't know it now.
when the time comes up you'll know.
i have something to tell you too.
tomorrow night my fellows plan to steal the gold.
you must tell ratree then everybody can protect themselves.
we already knew it.
they won't be able to take the gold away.
i'll find the way to help you.
you, you, you, come along with me.
bye bye.
do you want to come with me?
go.
watch out.
yes.
you got it?
go..go..go.
how many times you already got?
second round.
i finished 3 rounds.
i like that fierce looking man.
he must have strong sperm.
i must get it this time.
ok..ok..stop!
i think their air's gone.
let's them have some rest.
we'll have some fun again tonight.
oh!
that's too bad.
i really want to be chaba.
she've got to only that man.
of course it's her first time.
he only belongs to her.
ok.
go back to work now.
get back to work.
girls. put it down.
hurry up, hurry up.
i take orange, papaya.
let me have some.
go ahead.
you'll have big problem if your sister knows that you protect him.
do you have any ways to help me?
you take him to hide at the big tree end of village.
i'll try to help you.
let thing here happen along their fate.
yes, thank you very much.
chaba.
who's that?
i'm asking who's that?
it's us.
then why're you here?
do you love me so much?
do you miss me so much?
go to hell, old bitch.
are you keen on me?
that's enough.
they're dead.
let's go.
gold, we're rich now.
hurry.
tuan, i think the gold should belong to two of us.
what do you mean?
damn date!
do you think who he is?
he always domineers you.
why don't we get rid of them, so, money would be only ours?
you're much worse that i thought.
let's go.
chaba, i'll take gold back to the villagers and i must go to warn.
no!
you can't go.
we must stay here.
let's things happen on their way.
where've you both been to?
we went to have some chat with people.
yeah, yeah.
do you see chart?
he must be in his woman's room.
hey!
what happen to them?
they're dead.
they took our gold.
kill them!
leave me don't come close.
leave me.
i say leave me.
back off.
i say back off.
your time is up.
what's that?
no, leave, leave me.
don't come close.
who are you?
our duty is to punish bad people.
are you afraid of me?
will you kill me?
if i want to do i would have done that first.
you still be a good man.
i'll help you.
don't come close.
don't come.
chaba.
date...
you're in love and making a mistake.
give him to me.
sister, give him a chance.
he's a good man but he had wrong friends.
but he did a bad thing.
now he repents.
please don't.
stop!
let him go.
he didn't do it here but he'll be punished his world.
but it's against our rules, misterss.
anyone comes in our world they must give their lives here, unless...
unless to exchange one's life.
who'll give up their lives for these dumb people who're worthless?
i do.
ratree, take over the job.
i apologize to everybody.
i broke the law.
i'm deserved to be punished.
she did nothing to this.
she has to be our mistress.
it's not too late to change your mind.
think about it.
go, go, i'm scared.
no!
stop it!
i order you to it now, chaba...
don't, chaba.
don't come close to me.
i won't do it again.
chaba, come with me, don't hurt me.
chaba...
this afternoon the boarder patrol police at aranyapratet quarter chased the gang who are suspicious of sinnakorn bank robbers before they tried to cross the boarder to cambodia.
the police have discovered the nightmare scene.
all of the gang've been killed but only one's survived.
later we found he was the bank employee... who's in a severe shock and be insane.
the police assumed the gang must be killed by a herd of wild animals torn their bodies in to pieces... while they tried to escape from the police.
and the police found many rocks wrapped in a big bag.
but the strangest thing is a survivor's hugging a human skeleton which the specialist estimated this skeleton must be about 1 ,000 years ago.
now the police and the back are checking money.
for the time being there's the latest report just half and hour ago
there're unidentified number of robbers attacked and got some weapons from narathiwas forest defensive center.
there police have been killed.
they're running away in the forest and the police are following them.
the further report 'll be present in the future.
__file_terminal__
the trouble with humor is that people think you must be joking
today, "tales of the swedish countryside"  takes us to the swirling rivers of the province of dalecarlia.
where able-bodied men float lumber, the gold of the woods.
this is a job for real men!
granhedsgården authorized therapeutic facility
28, 29, 30 31, 32, 33, 34 and swallow.
good morning, mr dahlgren.
good morning.
how was your bowel movement?
it was nice and firm.
have you slept well, gudrun?
no, i have a terrible headache.
those are withdrawal symptoms due to a lack of coffee.
don't forget our meeting.
there are only two guests this week, and you know what that means.
either we go bankrupt, or we'll have to go with the times.
we also need a new name.
something with a modern ring to it.
well, the name was good enough for dad.
we must be doing something wrong, we don't have enough guests.
the new granhedsgården"?
kulla- gården changed its name like that.
the health farm
this movie is based on countless eye-popping headlines
somewhere in scotland
bye.
he's here five times a day, he must have bulimia.
i bet it's for his grandchildren.
i hope so, for his sake.
diet breakthrough arne, 57, lost 50 kilos
hi!
i'm rebecka melin.
i'm stig helmer olsson.
are you throwing a kiddy party?
no, not exactly...
okay...
see you around.
an "authorized witch"?
we have an appointment with ole bramserud.
hi there!
my solicitor, claes palmstierna.
hello, i'm ole bramserud.
how's the golf game?
i just don't have the time anymore.
picture two professional musicians dressed in chicken suits.
i'll sing the jingle and niklas will show you the storyboard.
thou free-ranging chicken thou star of the north
thou tender, thou tasty and delightful
then a voice-over says: "grace your table with a svea broiler".
followed by the logo:
svea broiler, the swedish speciality.
how do you get blue chickens?
in the computer.
everything's digital.
we'll pan in and out, and add landscaping  and more chickens, if necessary.
that sounds expensive.
we're talking about an additional 300,000 to 400,000.
for extra editing procedures.
can we really afford an ad campaign for three million kronor?
bold moves for desperate times.
i hope you know what you're doing.
were they in mourning?
they wore black.
no, that's the way admen dress nowadays.
the tokyo market was up three percent.
while frankfurt was down 2,3 %.
here's your laundry.
hello, ma.
what are we going to do with you, stig helmer?
you can't stay glued to the tv like some kind of couch potato.
just look at you, you used to be so slim.
you should join "the poundhunters".
elsa lost 15 kilos, you know.
your fingers are all yellow, have you started smoking?
that's from the snacks.
all that junk...
the stockholm market took a dive today...
why are you watching this?
the remote control is broken.
i'll do the vacuuming next week, but please pick the place up a bit.
she wasn't really right for you.
bye, take care.
hi!
could you possibly give me a hand?
i'd like to rearrange some stuff.
sure.
do you have a cat?
a cat?
no...
i thought i heard a cat in distress.
maybe the sound came from upstairs.
i don't think it's right to keep cats in town.
this is how i live.
it's nice.
what's that?
whales.
i like to meditate to their songs.
hear the heartbeat...
it's the sound you heard in the womb.
please give me a hand with the bed.
there's some negative energy over here.
have you heard of feng shui?
it's about fields of energy, ley lines.
help pull the bed over here a bit.
that's fine.
no, it doesn't feel right.
there's too much sha qi from that corner...
east...
no, it's in conflict with my kuan number.
let's have another go at it.
pull it towards you.
be careful, now.
this feels good...
it'll work if i put a bagua in the corner.
what's your sign?
no, don't tell me...
you're a taurus, aren't you?
you move like a taurus.
what date?
may 5th.
the fifth day of the fifth month, what a surprise!
that means you're a romantic that likes to be in the spotlight.
i don't know about that...
thanks, please accept a photograph of your aura.
put your hand right there.
i'm going to take a picture of your aura, your magnetic field.
say cheese!
i was only kidding.
that's weird, you hardly have an aura at all.
your chakras appear to be out of harmony.
your sahasra seems to be blocked.
your crown chakra...
and you blinked.
are you sad about something?
i'm not exactly happy...
you should consider therapy.
i don't know about that...
think about it.
i could be your coach.
i could be your personal guidance counselor.
the poundhunters 71 kilos.
wow, you've lost 8 kilos!
that's fantastic!
could you tell us your secret?
my mother's been visiting for two weeks now, and she thinks i'm fat  so she nags me a lot, and i clean house to blow off steam.
i guess cleaning is good exercise.
camilla.
77 kilos.
you've gained two kilos.
invite your mother to stay!
how was it?
embarassing.
everyone seems to lose weight but me.
it's expensive too - 4,000 kronor!
for that you get weighed in public every two weeks  and you get a skimpy booklet of diet tips.
for 2,000 you can weigh yourself alone at my place.
i'm going to quit "the poundhunters" and start dieting for real.
70 kilos?
it must be a slow news day.
some ley lines...
a pinch of sha qi and some negative energy...
some feng shui...
a splash of therapy...
and the singing of the whales...
hello, i brought you something to cheer you up.
here, it's the very latest thing.
you punch in the numbers here.
height: 1.9 meters.
sex: male, right?
just step right up.
on that thing?
your weight is 102 kilos, your body mass index is 28.
recommended dietary intake 6-7 megajoules if sendentary.
10 megajoules if active.
have a nice day.
great, isn't it?
and if it doesn't behave itself, just remove the batteries.
found yourself a job yet?
no, i'm too old...
too old?
don't give up!
like i've always said, life is full of possibilities.
you're a man in the prime of life.
you're just a trifle too pregnant, that's all.
is this what you had in mind?
i had pictured something a bit more humoristic.
oh...
what should we try then?
how about this?
not bad...
do you have chicken suits?
yes, this way.
would you prefer the kind with an eggshell hat?
they're very popular.
no, thank you.
cowls or just beaks?
cowls, please.
how about accessories?
like an egg basket that squeaks?
or an inflatable cock's comb?
hi there, ole.
hi there, stig helmer.
i hope these will do.
they're great.
perfect...
okay, you guys, put the costumes on.
phat!
your jacket's phat.
is it vintage?
you know - old.
i bought it in 1970.
it's so happening.
take a look.
we did a spread for wallpaper yesterday.
you've always been a happening guy.
thou free-ranging chicken, thou star of the north
cut!
you're standing too close together.
"svea broiler", take 11.
playback.
the mike is showing.
take 37.
one hen per 10 square meters.
we're finished.
damned european union...
pretty soon every chicken will be entitled to its own bathroom.
the danes have dumped the price of broilers.
no...
this won't do...
we're history.
andwe just bought two tons of chicken feed, too.
maybe we should accept that ridiculous danish bid.
or go into receivership.
go bust?
i'd rather go to hell.
i've got to cancel our commercial with that norwegian guy.
what insurance do we have?
full coverage.
why do you ask?
in case something should happen.
it's nice to get away from the rat race, isn't it?
hi, roger.
go ahead and torture me.
you're late.
are you very busy?
yeah, with a tricky commercial.
let's get started on our regular program.
good work, ole.
slow down on your way back and bend your elbows.
like this?
perfect.
sorry about that, it's my cell phone.
bramserud advertising.
what?
you don't...
all right.
okay...
well, no more tricky commercial...
damn!
what is it?
my arm is going numb.
that's not good.
my friend's a cardiologist.
what's that?
a heart specialist.
i'm ole bramserud.
i'm nurse kristian.
you'll find doctor westerberg over there.
ole bramserud.
karin westerberg.
you're not swedish, are you?
your situation isn't serious.
but you are burning yourself out.
that's trendy.
you're no longer in your 20s.
slow down a bit, both with regard to work and work-outs.
take walks instead, take a week off and pamper yourself.
i won't need a walker?
i've fried you a chicken.
don't mention the creatures!
the broiler factory's giving us trouble.
i'm sorry to hear that.
what's that?
i'm dieting.
what is it this time, the pineapple diet?
the stewardess method?
your phone calls last longer than your diets!
that stuff smells like our chicken feed.
how much do they charge for it?
590 kronor.
do you know how much it costs to manufacture it?
2 or 3 kronor, tops!
590 kronor...
for accurate readings, both feet must be placed on scales.
body mass index 14.
you have lost 49 kilos.
congratulations.
you weigh 142 kilos.
your body mass index, body mass index...
hands up!
what are you doing?
why are you waving a golf club?
i thought you were a burglar.
someone broke into the lundin's place last week.
aren't you supposed to eat regularly?
and shouldn't you avoid drinking concentrated sauces?
that stuff's supposed to be diluted.
bruno, what should i do?
i can't handle this any more.
go somewhere, try a week at a spa.
either that, or we'll just have to buy a fridge with a time lock.
good night.
lift your feet up.
therapy?
well, i never!
throwing out good money on therapy when you're unemployed.
no one in our family has ever done anything like that.
a rest home!
it's a spa, ma.
what's the difference?
i bet that norwegian friend of yours is behind this.
oh no...
the vacuum cleaner's clogged with cheese oodles again.
they're called "cheese doodles", ma.
i'll be back at three.
what should i do with these?
send them back to anderhage.
don't even mention the word 'chicken' in the future.
i won't, boss.
that feels better.
are you going to the new age fair?
i'll be working at granhedsgården.
peeling carrots?
no, they're making the place over.
they're offering a specialty week called "the whole person".
how much do i owe you?
625 plus tax.
do you accept credit cards?
of course.
do you like your new place?
the vibes are good.
how are the neighbors?
one's coming along to the spa.
someone sorely in need of therapy.
is she?
is he?
he's a bulimic mommy's boy.
the silent type.
out of touch with his feelings.
i'm going to coach him.
it's going to be challenging.
it's my pleasure to welcome dr levander.
i'm sure you're familiar with his tv shows and books  like "eating the right way" or "i can fly".
they'll be on sale at the desk.
please go ahead.
thank you, ulla.
right now, the trend in holistic medicine is specialty weeks.
the idea is to offer package deals to massage the soul.
modern people want more than just a plate full of raw vegetables.
that is why i made this list  of activities that should be available at a modern spa.
the first heading is stress management  with activities such as basic yoga, tai chi, qi gong
circulation massage, rebirthing, rosen therapy
shiatsu therapy and sacred dancing.
the next heading is fitness.
this includes aerobics, step-up, spinning
aqua aerobics, mantric jogging, mud packs and aromatherapy.
a new feature is underwater speakers  that play the song of the dolphins.
the final heading is experiences:
cosmology and mentalism
heart-walks, walking on hot coals and survival courses.
another new feature is that guests may bring their pets along  to meet a dietician or a psychologist.
the canine jacuzzi is very popular.
last, but not least, we come to the menu.
our target group expects something fancier than grated carrots.
we get it.
any questions?
ping-pong yoga...
quiet, nisse!
that's qi gong.
their special package deal is called "the whole person".
but you want to return half as big, right?
should we give it a try, you think?
yes, you need to diet.
and i need to take it easy.
one week, including meals:
5,000 kronor.
one week, excluding meals:
7,000 kronor.
i don't mean to offend you, but why don't you go for the fast?
aren't you going to fast?
nope, doctor's orders.
i need to consume more fat.
i have some kind of scurvy in reverse.
the next time i see my dietician, i'll slug him with a pork loin.
but now it's time for dessert.
it may be the last one we ever see.
what are you doing?
scraping my tongue.
it's supposed to make your breath sweeter, in case you ever get kissed.
you fall for everything.
i read about it in a magazine.
i bought you this.
what is it?
a potency patch?
it enhances potency.
where do they go, over your eyes?
that wasn't very nice!
take a look at yourself.
exciting, huh?
by the way, i did your horoscope.
don't make any crucial business decisions this month.
what a load of crap!
are we living in the dark ages?
lots of major companies consult astrologers before making decisions.
suit yourself.
good-night.
kissy, kissy!
let's slow down a bit.
and then pick up the tempo.
and slow down again.
changing pace like this in intervals  improves your stamina and helps burn more fat.
we do have a regular bike, and the area is very scenic.
i thought we weren't going to discuss this any more.
by the way, claes and i are going to fly over to the broiler factory.
will you be home for dinner?
i'll let you know.
don't pull anything, like you did with that rowing machine.
you know i don't like flying.
you should see somebody, try dr levander.
flying's safer than driving, and i need to rack up mileage.
i have something to show you.
i have a brilliant idea.
this is my idea.
did you drag me all the way over here to show me chicken feed?
you're looking at five million kronor.
what do you mean?
i'll tell you.
swedes are getting fat from stuffing their faces with potato chips.
that's when it hit me...
diet chips.
diet chips?
people can eat all the chips they want, without the guilt.
what are these chips made out of?
the two tons of chicken feed left over from our broiler factory.
the factory we're going to unload.
each bag costs 75 kronor, and that amounts to a profit of 9, 925 kronor per bag.
how do we get people to eat it?
people eat anything.
we threw a party when i was in college.
we served bowls of "doggy delight" and people gobbled it up.
"doggy delight"?
dog food, the dried variety.
it's nothing but a scam, that's illegal.
no, it isn't.
i had the crap camilla bought analyzed, and it's the same stuff.
it consists of the by-products of fish and some minerals and vitamins.
it's absolutely brilliant, isn't it?
welcome to the health-food business!
what will people think about this hocus-pocus?
and dragging city-folks into the wild for survival training?
i don't think so, ulla.
it stinks!
just look here.
our new ad  has booked us solid for four weeks.
let people talk!
you take care of the kitchen and i'll take care of the rest.
well, what if dad had lived to see this?
well, dad...
i hope they serve linseeds and bran in heaven.
give my best to camilla.
inger...
do you think you could persuade camilla to go to a fat farm?
she's desperate.
i'll give her a call.
the chips ought to contain something japanese, like seaweed.
and a fat blocker, too.
it's all the rage.
focus your energy on the factory, before it ruins us.
never fear!
don't shed a tear, my dear for my sake...
here.
it's almost time.
what the hell...?
i thought this was settled, it will give us publicity.
the two top local papers will both be there!
don't be such a stick in the mud.
stop it!
this display of initiative by ulla lundgren  has created jobs and put our town on the map the true spirit of enterprise that our region needs.
the gustav vasa spa is now open to the public.
let's go for some patterning.
stick your index finger into the first hole in the dial.
take a deep breath  and declare your affirmation out loud: "i'm safe in the air".
i'm safe in the air.
move your finger to the next hole  and repeat the affirmation.
i'm safe in the air.
do this twice a day, preferably in conjunction with meditation.
meditation?
i'm not into spacey stuff like that.
just find a quiet moment.
how's business?
we're having some ups and downs.
we got stuck with a broiler factory that isn't going well at all.
but now we're in the health-food business.
what about you?
i can't complain.
there are phobics, hypochondriacs and people obsessed with their looks.
there's no shortage of people in trouble.
bruno and i would like to discuss collaborating with you.
guess what?
i bought a pair of rubber pants.
are you going to take up diving?
no, it's to combat cellulite.
what does bruno think about that?
we don't share a bed any more.
he says that i snore.
that you snore?
men!
i'm glad you're going to the spa.
it's going to be interesting.
but in my opinion, bruno and claes should be the ones to go.
overweight men are time bombs.
don't say that!
bruno says the only exercise he gets  is being a pallbearer at funerals for his fitness-freak friends.
he doesn't want to be in good shape when he dies.
well?
slim quick"...
who developed it?
experts.
has it been tested?
yes.
it's been tested extensively on animals.
diet chips...
it sounds interesting...
vegans in chicken suits raid meat transport van
amazing...
some militant vegans have attacked another meat shipment.
according to witnesses, they were dressed in chicken suits.
you're lucky nothing like that has happened to you.
chickens!
what about your vitamins?
i'll take them later.
have a nice time at the gustav vasa spa.
give my best to inger.
i would have taken you there in my plane  but i've got a lot of stuff cooking.
that's right, chicken suits.
just like our commercial.
isn't that something?
i'm on my way.
95% of sweden must be woodlands.
you sure have a lot of gadgets.
a compass, a thermometer a gage for inclines and one for altitude, and a clock.
air conditioning, a radio, a gps navigation system...
and according to its reading, we are close to brännforsen.
yes, i know.
how?
i read the sign over there.
signs are for cheaters, stig helmer.
the gustav vasa spa...
let the torture commence.
hello, stig helmer.
hi, i'm rebecka.
i'm ole.
did you have a nice trip?
i got a bit car-sick...
it's probably psychosomatic.
we'll cure you.
see you later.
therapy, you say?
lucky you.
i always overpack.
that's not excessive.
this is just my small suitcase.
what a beautiful place!
not to mention expensive.
we could have gone to barbados.
he's a food smuggler.
how can you tell?
i know the type.
remember the guy who brought roast beef in his dressing case?
someone even stored pancakes in a container for face cream.
it's incredible!
i'm ulla, and i'd like to welcome you to the gustav vasa spa.
we'll start by introducing the staff.
anna teaches classes in sacred dance, tai chi and qi gong.
rebecka is our shihatsu therapist.
and rainbow is our vegetarian chef.
linda is our dietician, and composed the drink you have received.
and my brother nils is a jack of all trades.
we have a few house rules.
this is a drug-free environment.
toxic substances such as alcohol, nicotine and caffeine are off limits.
we promote life, not death.
fasting gives you bad body odor.
your body is cleansing itself.
for others, the increased intake of roughage may give you gas.
this is because your body is accustomed to eating dead animals.
this discomfort is reduced by daily colonic irrigation.
purchase your own personal nozzle at the desk.
write your name on it so it won't get lost.
or stolen.
back down onto the nozzle...
and then you just turn on the hose.
one last thing, please turn off your cell phones.
it's pretty warm...
it's nice.
just so we get acquainted
i'd like us to take each other by the hand and sing a song.
that's silly, it's not like this is kindergarden.
it's just a way of getting to know each other, åke.
rest in peace, dear calorie
soon you will be eaten
hidden deep inside of us
digested and forgotten
it's like being able to print your own money.
i'm a genius.
we used to only serve grated, raw vegetables.
rainbow has written a cookbook.
"esoteric cuisine".
so dad's book isn't good enough anymore?
did your dad write cookbooks too?
the recipes are very orthodox.
gut feeling"...
stocks in high-risk projects in the former east bloc belong down the drain.
that's all for tonight, we'll be back in two weeks.
we'll be taking a critical look at diet aids  and how the obese are taken advantage of.
the "diet king" will be featured.
he made millions selling useless pills to overweight swedes.
thanks...
i should have put more pressure on that stock broker.
he's pretty slippery.
diet chips...
that guy has been irritating me for quite some time.
find the manufacturer and analyze the ingredients.
i'm a bit sceptical about these kinds of places.
are you a believer?
a believer?
do you believe in crystal therapy and horoscopes?
no, but it's fun to see what places like this are all about.
i came here to take it easy.
to rest.
my friend was going to stay here, so i decided to tag along.
what do you do when you're not keeping friends company?
i own a small outfit...
an advertising agency.
bramserud advertising.
bramserud, that's me.
my name is inger.
i'm considering retirement, though...
leaving the rat race, reading some of the books i've bought.
maybe even take bracing walks.
my ex started taking ten kilometer walks when he turned 40.
and that was the last anyone ever saw of him.
are you married?
not that i recall.
possibly married to my work, but we're getting a divorce.
what about you?
i'm unmarried...at the moment.
good morning.
that looks yummy.
what is it?
a decoction of broccoli.
the new italian cuisine, huh?
what's this key gong stuff?
it's qi gong.
it's a chinese form of gymnastics, like karate in slow motion.
there was an emperor who outlawed martial arts  and somebody figured that they could do the same motions slowly.
off with your head!
i'm gouging your eyes out.
karate for snails.
if you practise for years, you can use your hands and feet  to make incredibly bad movies.
have you seen rainbow?
i think he went that way.
i think he's in the vegetable garden.
we live in a universal force field.
it can be measured with a squid.
a squid?
a super-conducting quantum interference device.
your aura is a force field and, as such, attracts energy.
at times, we need to recharge our batteries.
hugging a tree will do the trick.
trees willingly share their energy with us.
if you feel embarrased, stand with your back to the tree.
how exciting!
in your mind, greet the tree.
picture yourself inside the tree.
feel its roots.
what the hell...?
feel how the tree gets energy from the sun.
no way...
tree hugging!
well, it's better than nothing.
it's actually kind of nice.
give me a hug, stig helmer!
hug me!
let's have our first therapy session this afternoon.
don't wear heavy clothing.
i won't.
oh, ole and i were going to take a hungarian mud bath.
then we'll have our session after that.
don't forget to take a shower after the mud bath.
there you go.
thanks.
you have dandruff.
i'll prepare a conditioner with lavender and eucalyptus.
i'll also stimulate the acupressure points on the scalp  which counteracts baldness in the future.
slices of biodynamic cucumber  flush out toxins and remove wrinkles.
there we go.
relax completely.
i'm going to leave you for awhile.
make the most out of this session and exercise your pelvic floor.
okay, boss.
i feel like a sandwich.
rebecka's pretty cute for a witch.
she looks more like an imp.
tell me about your childhood.
what was your father like?
like most other dads.
but that isn't quite true, he was...
he had a handicap.
in what way?
he only had one arm.
he and his brother had a band together:
the olsson brothers dixie jazz band".
henry played the saxophone and my dad was the drummer.
even though he only had one arm?
it worked pretty well.
but he couldn't do drum rolls.
that's understandable.
he invented a gadget.
you're repressed.
your body stores these conflicts and makes you tense.
unexpressed grief and anger turn into a muscular coat of armor.
you really need to release some of that aggression.
just lay down, like that.
and lift your arms up like this.
what's this?
i want you to try to push me away.
i'll hold on tight and i want you to push me away.
here we go...
come on.
no...
come on, give it a go.
there's some broccoli stuck in your mustache.
come on!
stop it!
say you're a wimp!
come on, say you're a wimp!
look, stig helmer's getting licked by a girl!
you're the wimp!
what's that?
nothing, i guess...
that felt good.
good.
the energy is good.
there's a lot of aggression bottled up inside you.
you're an unusual man, stig helmer.
you're an only child, aren't you?
did you play ball with the kids in the neighborhood?
yes, but i wasn't very good.
if you're going to be a goalpost, you can't move around.
how does it feel to fast?
i feel a bit dizzy.
that's because of the toxins that are being eliminated.
i bet you ate a lot of junk food.
hot dogs, and stuff like that.
last night i had the strangest dream.
i'm ole, the king-sized hot dog!
eat me if you dare!
i'm so wonderfully greasy...
eat me!
you shouldn't eat anything that has eyes and can bear young.
i never thought of it that way.
you're a vegetarian then?
no, a fruitarian.
fruitarian?
i only eat fruit.
the richest food i eat is bananas.
but i don't eat bananas either, for other reasons.
you know, because of united fruit and pesticides.
it's so beautiful here...
it is.
evenings like this make me long to be back in norrland.
what city are you from up north?
härnösand.
those aqua gymnastics wore me out.
are you going to iron?
what a busy bee!
what's that?
wait and see.
presto - espresso!
great!
i was dying for some coffee.
right, enough is enough.
that norwegian guy seems very nice.
what, are you dumping the survival course instructor unseen?
i don't know...
bruno's on the phone all the time.
he and claes are up to something.
did you know that the yanks spend 30 times more a year on dieting  than the un spends on fighting starvation.
how's our project going?
brilliantly!
30,000 packages.
have you given any thought to my radical solution for the factory?
yes.
in my opinion, you're short on morals and long on imagination.
what of it?
it's against the law!
you have to help, you're in as deep as me.
wimp!
yes.
could you go pick the guru up?
he's arriving on the two o'clock train.
what does he look like?
oriental, i suppose.
right, six feet tall and blond.
what do i know?
make a sign and hold it up.
i wonder if it's ball-room dancing?
hardly.
do you like to dance?
i was the fred astaire of oslo some 15 to 20 kilos ago.
do you?
yes, if i get to pick my partner.
i don't like it when strange men fondle me like it was their right.
but i can always make an exception...
this is going to be interesting.
ginger rogers must have been a better dancer than astaire.
she did the same moves, only backwards and in high-heels.
why did you come along if you're going to be so negative?
because we paid a hell of a lot for this week.
and you suggested it.
good morning.
we'll start out with breathing exercises.
place one hand on your stomach, and the other on you back.
take a deep breath  all the way down to your pelvic floor.
envision a string running all the way through your body  and passing out through the top of your head off into the cosmos.
you're suspended on the string, and you twirl upwards to the heavens.
take a breath...
relax your arms and let them dangle.
the first phase is the flow.
each movement is followed by a new movement.
it's like tai chi, an eternal loop.
it goes on and on...
take a breath.
the next phase is chaos.
let your feelings out.
father no speak swedish.
is he a yoga teacher?
we have come to pick berries.
gustav vasa?
this guy thinks i'm the old king gustav vasa.
excuse me...
viswanathan raj?
gustav vasa?
right, gustav vasa.
don't close your eyes to the invisible.
he who looks outside is dreaming.
he who looks inside awakens.
oh, my...
i've never seen anything like it.
like what?
something's happened to you, stig helmer.
your crown chakra is demonstrating great cosmic energy.
a red aura signifies the seventh sense of change and psychic power.
you're heading in a new direction.
and you blinked...
would you like mine?
no, thank you.
what goal did you have this week?
i hoped to get rid of this...
i weighed myself this morning.
i've gained 20 grams.
really?
i must be the only person on earth who gains weight on a fast.
are you going to do the survival course?
i wonder what it involves.
yeah!
i feel like a new human being, not a chicken in days.
did you eat too much chicken?
it's a long story.
i'm really dreading this.
it's only for a few days.
it's interesting.
i've done it a few times.
you face the real you.
i hope she's skinny.
praeparatus supervivat", or "the prepared will survive".
we'll spend a couple of days in the wilderness.
and your only tool will be a knife.
please empty your pockets and place your belongings in the bag.
camilla!
here's a knife.
thank you.
your knife.
anything else?
what is that?
a gps navigator.
for satellite positioning.
take a knife.
may i take two?
no.
we're going to have an easy run on the river in a kajak.
i suggest that you pair off.
keep your kajak on course and paddle where the water is most swift.
that's where it's the deepest.
okay, men.
you get to head the expedition.
let's launch the next bunch.
move it, jan.
good luck!
it looks pretty unsteady.
try to paddle in time.
grab the oars, åke.
take it easy.
this is a message from svensk hydro.
the power plant at storforsen will open its floodgates at 1 pm.
this presents a danger to anyone on the river.
oh, my god!
here you go.
hello...
what?
what are the names of the guys paddling off in the distance?
stig helmer and ole, come back here!
what's going on?
the floodgates are open.
wait here, i'll go to the rapids.
there seems to be a lot of water.
don't break the rhythm!
hold on, stig helmer!
no, there's not a trace of them.
they've probably gotten further downstream.
an easy run", sure!
i'm never going to do this again.
have the rest of the gang backed out?
that leaves the two of us, then.
talk about a survival course!
what's the challenging run like?
you don't get a paddle.
a big steak with french fries wouldn't hurt right now.
but not for you, you're fasting.
i'm sorry...
they'll find us soon.
they have heat-detecting cameras.
look!
lingonberries.
no, these are bearberries.
arctostaphylos.
this is edible, it's a fern.
polypodium.
where did you learn all this?
i was a boy scout.
the beaver patrol".
are you all right?
i'm fine.
all that's missing is the cucumber...
we need to dry our clothes.
did you happen to learn about making fire?
the glass lenses of our wristwatches, sandwiched with some water  will make a magnifying glass.
then all we need is to gather some shelf fungi.
fomes fomentarius.
do you know the latin names of all kinds of plants?
just the ones we needed to learn to earn the "woodcraft badge".
the police just called.
they couldn't see them from the helicopter.
if you say "i told you so", i'll throttle you!
the kajak was found at brännforsen.
that's 60 kilometers from here!
here...
what's today's special?
shoots of pine.
some sourgrass, chanterelle mushrooms and pine gum.
and all this is edible?
the gum is like chewing gum.
it will help ward off hunger pains  while the shoots and sourgrass contain a lot of vitamin c.
you didn't happen to find a bottle of chablis premier cru 1982, too?
what a day!
too bad it wasn't sunny, we'll have to try the lenses some other time.
i can tell that you enjoy the outdoors.
i liked going on hikes.
i liked going on trips with the boy scouts.
i used to play in the forest when i was a kid.
i haven't seen you this happy for a long time.
but i don't think it's all thanks to the forest.
i bet rebecka has something to do with it, too.
she's a fun person, but she is a bit odd.
you suit each other.
you're a fun person, too, but you are a bit odd.
what a strange week this has been.
but they're out there somewhere...
i think.
isn't that typical?
as soon as you meet a nice man, he disappears.
body lotion?
not exactly, it's whiskey.
for emergencies.
did you bring everything?
the cans of spraypaint and stuff?
do we have to do this?
yes.
put on your gloves.
remember, you haven't seen a thing.
look, they'll see us with the surveillance cameras.
that's the point.
that's why we're wearing the suits.
put your nose on.
it's a beak.
look!
it's big bird!
well, they're not exactly minks.
we have to get them out before we blow the joint up.
but weren't we going to blow the car up?
there's not much insurance on that old wreck.
come on!
go spray some message on the truck, that's what they do.
what are you doing?
i was gong to write "swine".
it's a broiler transport!
write something like "murderers".
smurderers...
what should we do with these?
stuff them in that bag for now.
hold on, because it's going to blow!
what a blast!
i've been in the wrong business.
talk about raising the roof!
what are you fooling around with?
nothing.
stig helmer, wake up!
listen...
maybe they're looking for us.
wave!
this is a good spot to dump the stuff.
this is a good spot to dump the stuff!
did you see that?
it might be food.
that yellow stuff looks familiar.
hunger is making me hallucinate.
wake me up...
aren't these the suits i bought...?
somebody up there's pulling our leg.
well, at least these are warm and dry.
aren't you cold?
could it make any difference what you wear in a nightmare?
militant vegans blew up a broiler factory in österåsen.
the police have no leads as yet.
that would be bruno's factory!
two people appear to have died in the rapids.
their kajak was found below the falls.
over to the sports desk.
i know they're alive.
i can feel it!
blasted mosquitos!
maybe we should put on the hoods?
why not?
this must be a dandy of a diet.
it would make business sense.
what?
bramserud olsson botanical expeditions inc.
should we try that way?
no, let's go straight ahead.
finally, traces of civilization.
the trouble is, which way should we go?
let's go south.
how would you know that?
i checked out the anthill.
anthills are always bigger to the south.
you are absolutely incredible, "beaver".
what a strange country.
there are no berries, just weird people.
let's go home!
do you have any other bright ideas?
like going north?
look!
it's those militant vegans.
fire a warning shot and i'll call the police.
are they shooting at us?
i sure hope that's not a bird dog.
you've probably seen this man, dr b. levander  in situations where he can profit from our phobias and hypochondria.
recently, he's made a foray into the diet industry  with the product "slim quick".
let's consult our panel.
rune, you're a veterinarian.
what's do you think of the product?
it's an excellent product...
for chickens that need to gain weight.
in addition to fish by-products, our analysis revealed the presence  of the antibiotic coccidiostatika  which prevents parasites in chickens.
thank you, rune.
slim quick" is manufactured by bruno anderhage  the owner of svea broiler.
we heartily recommend the product "slim quick"  to people who are chicken-hearted and birdbrained.
down the drain it goes!
next time...
i knew it...
hush!
i don't want to hear a peep out of you.
anderhage, here.
it's about your insurance.
terrorist attacks aren't covered.
they're a "force majeure".
so we're not covered.
in accordance with item 71.
tell your ceo that we're going to appeal.
i am the ceo.
you are the ceo...
idiots!
i'll be going now...
to the police station.
to turn the two of us in.
it's just as well...
and i hope i never have to see you again bruno asshole!
what a wimp!
this is the police speaking.
lay face down on the ground with your arms over your heads.
don't worry, stig helmer.
they probably just want to see some id.
come in.
they've been found!
i knew it!
how are they?
fine, i think.
they'll be here soon.
here they come!
oh, here they come!
what on earth are they wearing?
stockholmers!
they think they're so superior.
i'm so glad you're alive.
but why are you dressed like that?
i don't know.
you'll have to ask ole, but i don't think he knows either.
we've been so worried.
why are you in chicken suits?
there's no sensible explanation.
hello, darling.
guess what?
i'm going to quit dieting forever.
you have to learn to love the person you are, visnawathan said.
he's a guru.
how have you been doing?
just dandy...
minus 22 kilos, and plus 73 hours of therapy later
i take great pleasure in presenting  one of the most accomplished disciples of visnawathan raj.
recently returned from a yoga center in nepal
krishnamacharays!
give him a big hand!
he was known previously as stig helmer olsson.
he who looks outwards is dreaming.
he who looks inwards awakens.
lift your feet, krishnamacharays.
what's the latin name for chickenberries?
it's "cornus suecia".
what about this chubby stonecrop, then?
you don't know?
it's called "sedum".
the herb of love, the livelong...
what's its name in latin?
it's "sedum telephium".
wake up, stig helmer...
wake up...
good morning.
hi there.
you were talking in your sleep.
i had such a strange dream.
good morning!
bramserud olsson botanical expeditions inc
what's the plan for today?
we should hike to blåfjället.
it's a great locality for angelica arcangelica, mountain angelica.
it'll take us a while...
it sounds too challenging.
don't worry...
i'll coach you.
__file_terminal__
many of you have now for quite a few of your years been talking about the idea of following your joy, acting on your bliss.
this is all well and good and it is a lovely lovely thought but the idea is to not leave it as a thought.
the idea is to fully understand why that is so cruicial, why that is so critical.
from our perspective we explain it this way:
what you call the sensation of joy, love and excitement and happiness is actually your physical body's translation of the vibratory energy that represents your true natural self.
that is who you are, that frequency is who you are by being created in the image of creation.
so anytime that you are willing to act, to act on things which contained the highest degree of joy, the hightest degree of excitement, the highest degree of passion, the highest degree of love, anytime you take action on any of those thing that contain that energy
you are thus functioning like the compass needle that points unerringly north to your specific frequency, the frequency that was designed to allow you to create your life along the path of least resistance.
that is why it is so important when you act on the things that contain in every living moment without expectation and with full integrity the highest amount of joy, you are staying most fully in alignment with your true self
and that will allow the synchronicity in your life to reflect back to you the idea of all the things that represent who you really are, and allow you to experience yourself as the true being you were created to be
and you will thus then through that action alone begin to remember bit by bit, day by day, piece by piece and whatever rate you are comfortable, you will begin to remember, re-member who you are.
you will be no longer be fragmented, compartmentalised concioussnesses but you are moving toward the idea of literally re-joining, re-membering, re-collecting, recollecting yourselves into who you actually are and as you wake up into who you actually are
you will then be understanding, truly understanding how creation works, the principles upon which it is based and you will see that even though you can make it very complex or very complicated, the fundamental mechanism of creating your reality
is very very simple and all degrees of complication simply come from one thing and one thing only:
a belief or a definition that is out of alignment with your true self.
now the only way, the only way in our perspective you can actually hold on to a belief or a definition of life, or a belief, or a definition of creation that is out of alignment with your true self
is if that definition or belief is unconscious.
but as soon as you identify, as soon as you define, as soon as you bring that belief that is out of alignment with your true self into conciouss realization, you will see very quickly one thing that is very important:
any belief, all belief, all definition that is out of alignment with your true self once brought into conciouss recognition will immediately and automatically appear non sensical, illogical.
it will not fit with who you know yourself to be.
it will no longer make sense for you to hold onto it.
you will see that it belongs to someone else.
you will see that you bought into it and taking it upon your self as your own.
perhaps from your parents, perhaps from your society, perhaps from your friends, perhaps from your loved ones.
but nevertheless, as soon as you can actually shine the light of your true concioussness on a belief or a definition that is out of alignment with who you truly are, you will see that it makes no sense to hold onto it any longer.
now, if you do continue to hold onto it longer then that moment of recognition then you can still approach it concioussly and ask yourself a question:
why, why would i hold onto something that i know is is out of alignment and illogical and makes no sense for who i know i'm truly am for then when you begin asking those questions are you truly in control of changing your reality and who you actually are.
the idea being that you do hold onto something you say you know doesn't serve you then you must have created another belief, an unconscious belief, an unconscious reason for why it makes sense to do so and so again you can use the very same understandings
to find what that belief is and keep doing that until you have rooted out all the unconscious beliefs and brought them into the light of concioussness and allow the fundamental foundational beliefs that are out of alignment to drift away, flow away,
turn into smoke which all they are, it's just smoke and mirrors.
your physical reality is just an illusion but the experience of it is real.
that's all that's real.
it's your experience of it but physical reality that which you have surrounding you seemingly is all taking place within your concioussness.
it is like a mirror.
you know, you all know that if you have a glass mirror on your planet and you see your reflection in it, and you reflection, the expression on your face in the reflection is frowning.
you don't go over to the mirror and try to change the reflection into a smile.
you do not manipulate the physical reality because it is only a reflection.
there is nothing there but you know the moment you actually decide to smile, the reflection has no choice but to smile back.
all of the difficulty and all of the complications and all of the pain and all of the suffering you have experienced on your planet has been from your attempt to manipulate the reflection instead of actually changing who you are.
that's all it takes, that's all it takes.
now, we understand that for many people it doesn't seem that simple but that's all right.
all that means that you have a belief that it's not that simple and it's only a belief.
this is what we are here to say.
any degree of difficulty and pain and suffering you have ever experienced is not because there is actually inherent difficulty built into creation.
all that only comes from the perspective that is created by the belief systems within your unconscious mind.
difficulty is not the purview of creation.
creation is automatic, manifestation is automatic.
it's immediate.
you all do it all the time.
if you are not automatically and immediately manifesting something all the time you wouldn't be having an experiental reality at all.
so the point is you don't have to learn how to manifest.
you don't have to learn how to trust the idea.
you don't have to learn how to do it faster.
you are already doing it automatically as fast as you possibly can.
the issue is:
what are you manifesting based on what you believe is possible.
that's the issue.
because you always believe something to be true and that's what creates the manifestation you experience.
so the question is what are you believing is true.
that's the only question that determines what you experience in your reality because you're all born to be automatic creators, automatic manifestors.
that's what it means when you say you are made in the image of god.
you are co-creators, you are expressions that are co-creating.
so the idea is you don't have to learn how to do that.
you don't have to learn how to trust because you always trusted something is true.
so again it's not about learning how to trust, learning how to manifest, learning how to do it faster.
all those thing are automatic.
it always comes down to simply what do i believe is true.
so the idea is that when you have difficulty, when you have struggle making a change it's because of your motivational mechanism is simply having upon it attached a belief that is not aligned with your true self.
for example:
you all have the same motivational mechanism, you all have the same motivational mechanism!
there is only one, there is only one, there are no exceptions.
no, not even you, no, not even you!
the idea is this:
here is what motivates everyone:
you will always, unerringly without fail, and i mean without fail, you will always move in the direction, change in the direction of what you believe to be most beneficial.
you will always without fail move away from what you believe to be more painful.
that should tell you a lot because if you find yourself constantly choosing the thing you know empirically. intellectually is more painful then what you say you would rather choose, then the question is:
why do i keep choosing something that i know is more painful then i'm saying i recognize is more painful then what i really prefer.
that's a really good question.
here is the answer:
the only reason you would do that is there has to be, there must be an unconscious belief attached to that thing that you say should be what excites you.
that for some reason is making that thing actually appear to be more painful then staying where you are.
you gotta find out what belief you would have to buy into to make your joy seem more painful then simply staying where you are no matter how painful it is.
this is the mechanism.
it works the same for everyone.
again, for example:
many people talk about the idea of wishing to attract wealth into their life physically.
yet at the same time they may have an unconscious belief that if they attract a certain amount of wealth that they will somehow stand out of society in a negative way and they don't want to stand out in a negative way.
and it's more important to them not to stand out in a negative way then it is to attract abundance.
so as long they have an unconscious belief that to be abundant won't be the standout in a negative way and it's more important to them not to, they will always make sure to do everything in their power to never attract abundance.
until such time as they get a handle, a conciouss recognition of the idea that they have that belief attached to their mechanism of their motivation but once they do they will see it makes no sense.
they will see:
i don't have to believe that.
that doesn't belong to me.
maybe that came from my mother, maybe that came from my father.
maybe that was the belief that they were brought up with and they imported to me telephatically while raising me but now i see that it makes no sense.
of course i can be abundant, of course i can be a nice person at the same time.
of course those things can go together.
so it doesn't make sense any longer to assume that it cannot be abundant or somehow i will be rendered into a negative personality.
that is what we are talking about:
identifying the belief will show you that it is illogical and nonsensical and once you identify it, the very act of identifying it releases you from it.
because you have to redefine things in a matter that works for you.
for example:
many of you define the idea of a habit or a pattern as something that's difficult to change.
that's just the definition.
from our perspective here is a new defintion:
a habit is something you knew that you don't you are doing.
once you know you are doing it, if you doing it again it's not a habit, it's a choice.
so, once you understand it's not a habit anymore and it's a choice, you are now empowered to do something about changing it.
where as if you just assigned it to the idea that it's still habitual, you have no power over it because it's still unconscious but once you know it's a choice then you can ask yourself the fundamental question:
what would i have to believe is true about my relationship to this thing in order to believe that way.
to feel this way.
once you start exploring that, once you start examining that, you will find great clarity coming to you to the synchronicity in your life.
so allow yourself the oppurtunity to recognize that you can change the definition of things in a matter that worked for you because all things have the ability to perform double duty.
no thing in life has built in meaning.
i know this will sound a little funny in your language but the truth of it is that life is meaningless.
what i mean by that is there is no automatic built in meaning to anything.
if you wanna put it another way you could say the meaning of life is for you to give it meaning.
but the meaning you give it ultimately determines what effect you'll get out of it.
the effect you'll get out of it is totally based on how you define your reality.
this is simply what you have already recognized as the law of attraction.
what you put out is what you get back.
it's as simple as that.
it's all about how you define your world, your reality and your relationship to it.
that's all it's based on.
it's that simple.
yes, it is that's simple.
you don't have to believe it's that simple.
that's up to you, that's your choice.
if you wanna make it very complicated we would never take that away from you.
because that's your choice, that's your path and if you wanna do that, our blessings to you!
however we are here to simply let you know that it doesn't have to be that way and it is completely in your power to determine what it is you will experience and every facet and every aspect of your life.
__file_terminal__
jean.
jean!
jean, don't let it take you over!
fight it!
professor x, she's no longer in control of herself.
she's under mind control .
she's not responding to my telepathic calls .
it must be the work of mastermind.
it's dangerous out there.
jean's an omega-level mutant.
damn!
if she goes supernova, we're all dead.
damn!
jean!
wait, cyclops!
jean!
jean, don't do this.
cyclops.
jean?
scott, it has to be done.
you have to kill me.
you know l could never do that!
l can feel it taking over.
i'll end up killing you and others.
don't let them control you!
you can fight them!
you can do it!
l believe in you!
i'm sorry, l can't.
yes, you can!
that's just mastermind talking!
jean, l love you!
you're the one controlling her mind!
jean, what are you doing?
what's happening to her body?
damn!
she's going to self -destruct!
we need to leave!
you have to fight it!
jean, stop!
l love you, scott.
jean!
in the course of evolution, accidents can occur.
we who are born with the "x-gene" have a gift
but those gifts also led to our kind being ostracized by the rest of humanity .
i created the xavier institute and hoped that it would give young mutants a place where they could be themselves.
a place to learn about their powers without fear of persecution.
in order to make the world a better place for mutants and humans alike.
ateam of elite mutants.
the x-men.
but look at us now.
it's been nearly a year since they tried to destroy us.
nearly a year since they almost succeeded.
an intense fight broke out between us and the inner circl a group of outlaw mutants .
that day, we lost one of our best and brightest
a member of our family .
jean grey.
what is it, children?
now, come here, everyone.
you're afraid, l understand.
but please, don't worry.
as long as you're here, the teachers and l will do everything to protect you.
that goes for you too.
you are...
wait!
l can't read your thoughts.
wait, who are you?
the same dream.
again and again.
who's there?
who is it?
as you know, the institute is inactive for the time being.
when did this happen?
right, l see.
in that case, we'll be glad to help you as much as we can.
goodbye.
pirates!
a gang of pirates!
we're all gonna die.
that's how these things always end!
everyone, please, step back.
and you are?
they're gone now.
that was amazing!
thank you so much.
you're one of those x-men, aren't you?
maybe.
excuse me.
according to my research, it is evidently possible to enhance the intelligence level of this creature to that of a human.
this is a decapodiform cephalopod, of the mollusca family .
in short, a squid.
we can communicate with him using this waterproof wireless microphone.
is he serious?
l have to see this.
i'm afraid l must leave early .
mr. devilfish will finish my lecture for me.
that squid's gonna finish his lecture?
calm down, everyone.
now, where were we?
yes, the neurological aspects of cognitive intelligence.
any questions?
come on!
sir, do you have any more metal objects?
listen, you're not gonna find anything on me!
trust me.
but the machine is detecting metal
l can't take these off.
okay, now you've seen them.
are we good?
well , l ..
change of plans.
looks like i'm headed to new york.
hello, charles !
welcome home, ororo.
i've missed you.
you know, some of us have things to do.
l had to cancel my vacation.
so how's it going, charles ?
still bald , l see.
logan, welcome.
l can't tell you how happy l was to get your call .
between faculty meetings and dining hall food, being a professor can get rather dull .
it's good to have you all back again.
where's cyclops?
it would seem he's not quite ready to return to us yet.
last week, a teenage girl named hisako ichiki, who lives in northern japan, disappeared on her way home from school
unable to find any clues, her parents contacted me for help .
if they called you, charles , then does that mean the girl is...
one of us, yes.
though she only exhibited her powers once, when she was very young.
once?
that's unusual
her father is an old friend of mine.
while the x-gene runs in her family , neither her father nor her mother has it.
they fear that her disappearance might have something to do with them.
probably a runaway.
why don't we just let the cops handle it?
the problem is, they began investigating, but inexplicable accidents injured many of them.
so that's why no progress has been made.
the obvious inference being that someone doesn't want this girl found.
someone who's hunting mutants?
recently , there have been many incidents involving mutants in northern japan.
but even cerebro could not detect any mutant activity there.
big deal your brilliant gizmo's probably just got a worn out doohickey or something.
and you aren't getting any younger yourself , charlle.
logan!
just kidding.
take it easy.
professor,
cerebro might have a flaw.
i'll look into it.
anyways, l believe there could be a bigger problem behind her disappearance.
so l want the x-men to go to japan and find this girl l agree that something has to be done, charles .
but what about scott?
we're not the x-men without cyclops.
unbellevable.
don't tell me you've been hanging out here this whole time.
where do you wash yourself ?
there's nothing wrong with cerebro.
all mutant activity shows up clearly .
only tohoku comes up blank.
l knew it wasn't broken.
perhaps something or someone is cloaking the area, preventing it from being scanned.
whatever it is, it may be connected with hisako's disappearance.
well , we'll find out soon enough once we get to japan.
by the way, was it wise to send logan to bring back cyclops?
that's why l sent ororo along with him.
l can't fight anymore.
you need a reason to fight, and i've lost mine.
no, scott.
this is not a fight.
we'll just find this mutant girl and rescue her.
and if some bad guys try to stop us, we're gonna have to fight them.
wolverine!
come on.
listen to him, will you?
full of self -pity.
he'd be useless to us anyway.
he acts like he owns her.
as if jean meant nothing to the rest of us!
jean would die all over again if she saw the way you're acting.
wolverine!
that's not funny!
what did l do?
hit a nerve?
you wanna feel real pain?
say her name again.
bring it on.
that's enough!
why do you have to pretend that you don't care?
is it that hard to admit that you've been worried about him, too?
scott, we have to find her.
she's out there.
there are still people that need you.
the x-men need you.
you know it's what jean would have wanted.
well , you know where we'll be.
so beautiful so far away.
they shine down on every living thing on earth.
on humans, and on mutants.
scott, the x-men are the light shining down on all mutants.
l want to be the light that shines down on all children, mutants and humans.
what is it?
i'd recognize that smell anywhere.
well , well , if it isn't summers,
the guy who brought shoulder pads and tights back in fashion.
we're on a mission, wolverine.
call me cyclops.
the x-men have received a call for help .
there's a young girl in japan who desperately needs us.
welcome back, cyclops.
it's been a year since you've driven this.
are you sure you're okay?
at least l do a better job than the way you handle your bike.
with cyclops back on board, the x-men go to tohoku, a region of japan.
their investigation uncovers
that hisako is not the only mutant who has disappeared.
a highly scientific group of mutant hunters, the u-men, stand in their way.
as the x-men infiitrate their hide-out they uncover a horrifying secret
next time on x-men.:
u-men.
__file_terminal__
flying object confirmed.
mutant signal detected.
it's the x-men's blackbird.
they are approaching this location.
the x-men...
they've finally made a move.
activate anti-x-men weaponry.
we've entered tohoku's airspace.
i'm starting the descent
we should be landing at the lchiki household in about 30 minutes.
roger that.
so that's the upgraded portable cerebro, huh?
yes.
i've enhanced it so that even non-telepaths can detect mutants.
l see you're checking it right away.
you also suspect charles of losing his skills?
i'm just devoted to the mission.
sure, sure.
l see they've come.
please don't worry.
with our technology, we have nothing to fear from the x-men.
i'm looking forward to it.
good.
someday, professor x, i'll have you visit, too...
yes.
this is where we found hisako's backpack.
if only we'd walked her to the bus stop...
our car had broken down that day.
but she had an important test, so we let her take the bus.
she came home with the other kids in the evening, but walked home alone from the stop.
and here...
did you always pick her up?
yes.
other children have gone missing, so...
other children?
more than 20 young mutants have disappeared in the past few years.
but the actual number is higher.
most people didn't want to make their child 's disappearance public.
but, why keep it a secret?
unexplained accidents are common lately.
many people suspect they are caused by mutants.
so people are afraid of being looked at oddly or discriminated against...
will the day ever come when people understand mutants?
the number of people who have gone missing is significant.
l guess it may be a case of mutant hunting, after all.
then it's probably the u-men.
l heard a rumor they've been hanging around japan lately.
the u-men?
they misuse mutant abilities to try and destroy humanity.
they're an organization of mad scientists.
that was mr. fujiwara!
his grandson's gone missing!
oh, honey...
he disappeared while on a delivery for the liquor store where he works.
is the boy also...
he's from a mutant family.
we're going to check out his workplace.
you guys handle the fujiwaras.
yes.
we'll meet up later.
yeah, this is the kid.
you're positive?
yeah.
but it was two weeks ago, not yesterday.
what?
see, there's a restaurant at the foot of that mountain.
he didn't come back.
that's the last l heard of him.
l only found out later, but apparently he was a mutant.
what did they do this time?
they use their powers for nothing but accidents and disasters.
wait, you guys aren't mutants, are you?
and if we are?
wolverine, cut it out.
l didn't mean anything by it... l have to make a delivery, so...
thanks for your time.
man, what are they sniffing around here for?
it's so creepy.
what we've done for mutants...
has it gotten us anywhere?
what did jean die for?
a restaurant at the foot of the mountain?
a high school student delivered something there just before he vanished.
i'm going ahead.
scott...
it wasn't fujiwara's grandpa who called the lchikis.
what?
they were so worried about what people would think, they kept it a secret.
from the lchikis, too.
that call was a trap to lure us out.
bring it on!
they're here already, huh.
so the u-men have finally made something decent.
what makes you so sure it's the u-men?
l fought an older version of these bots once.
they were kid's toys in comparison, though.
do something, cyclops!
i'm on it!
the x-men...
i'm worried about scott and logan.
let's worry about ourselves for now.
you're right.
are you all right, storm?
yes, barely.
cyclops!
you're getting in too deep!
you're going to get killed.
these people...
as long as they're around, the senseless attacks on mutants won't stop.
what are you charging in for?
don't be so reckless!
they're coming!
looks like we finished them off, cyclops.
l understand how you feel, but had l not been watching, it could have been worse.
get a grip.
l don't need your advice.
let's go.
the mobile unit has been annihilated.
whatever.
it's within range of what l expected.
we gathered data.
begin analyzing the x-men's abilities and developing new countermeasures.
leave it to me.
our science will bring them to their knees.
the u-men?
are you sure?
logan confirmed it from the weapons that attacked us.
the mutant detection jamming, the case of hisako ichiki and the disappearance of mutants in this area all seem to be their work.
the u-men, homo sapiens supremacists, harvest mutant organs and steal mutant powers in order to fight evenly with mutants.
it's definitely possible.
we're on our way to meet with scott and logan and infiltrate the enemy base.
please be careful.
this looks like it'll be a tough battle...
the sasaki institute has been closed.
unable to connect
an abandoned hospital?
yes.
a specialized medical facility.
it was closed 20 years ago.
the people nearby are afraid and steer clear of it
huh.
sounds like the perfect place for their hq.
l can't sense anyone.
don't let your guard down.
it may be a trap.
l wouldn't mind.
what was that?
it...
it hurts...
help...
help me...
it hurts!
it's the delivery boy who went missing!
cyclops, wait!
cyclops!
what are you doing?
focus!
wolverine, stop!
he's a mutant!
but, if he's been modified this much...
the scanner's readings are so far past the limit, it can't calculate it.
i'm sorry, but he's too far gone.
we can't save him.
but...
cyclops!
l feel sorry for him, but all we can do is put an end to his pain!
storm!
stop!
stop it!
get a hold of yourself !
do it now!
cyclops!
l feel better.
thank you.
save them...
my friends are still in...
there.
what on earth are the u-men trying to accomplish here?
what meaning does a fight like this have?
mutants killing each other...
you bastard, do you want jean's death to be for nothing?
like you could ever understand how l feel!
sometimes you have to harden your heart!
as x-men, such is our fate!
especially if you are the leader!
let's go.
let's hurry.
storm, are you okay?
yes.
what is this facility?
looks like a chemical laboratory or something.
this girl's...
it 's hisako ichiki!
what?
there's a woman sleeping here, too.
why...
why?
why is she here?
the mutant telepath , emma, was imprisoned with hisako.
she claims she's there to help hisako, as her teacher, but the x-men have their doubts.
that' s when todd, a leading mad scientist for the u-men, attacks.
and in the fierce battle that follows,
hisako's mutant powers awaken.
next time on x-men.:
armor.
__file_terminal__
the infamous miss frost.
emma frost.
one of the four leaders of the inner circle.
their white queen.
we should be careful, she's an extremely powerful telepath.
why is she sleeping in the u-men hideout?
you...
what the hell are you doing to jean's mind?
jean's mind?
what the hell does that mean?
the person who was manipulating jean's mind was...
emma frost!
what did you say?
emma was the one manipulating jean when jean transformed into phoenix.
wait.
hold on, we were there too.
why didn't any of us see her?
l was right there.
and l saw her, make no mistake!
l tried desperately to talk some sense into her.
then that woman murdered jean.
wolverine, don't be ridiculous.
we know what happened, jean took her own life.
she sacrificed herself for us and for the world .
who's to say this girl didn't put that idea in her head?
she's a telepath, isn't she?
what the hell are you doing?
now is not the time.
we came here to find a missing girl, not to avenge jean...
who says!
when the time comes, i'll be the one to do it.
attacking her while she sleeps wouldn't exactly be fair, now would it?
stop playing around!
this woman murdered jean.
if you say so, do whatever you like then.
but do you want to be a coward and act like the members of the inner circle?
they will steal the young mutant organs that we made so much effort to acquire.
let' s attack them now!
patience, doctor.
it's not every day the x-men deliver themselves to our doorstep.
let's not waste the opportunity.
continue collecting your data.
how much damned data do we need!
our opponents are the x-men.
they may still be concealing their true abilities.
nothing is more important in battle than data, data, data.
lock up the room with the mutants .
understood.
jean grey?
what are you talking about?
you manipulated people with your telepathy and drove them to suicide.
answer me!
l know about your battle with the inner circle.
it was one year ago.
but, l had already left them by then.
left them?
l was not part of the attack.
i'm not crazy.
l saw you there, right before jean died.
l don't know who or what you saw, but it wasn't me.
you're mistaken!
even though you say that... l can't take your word for it, you were a member of the inner circle.
l didn't tell you to take my word for it.
just think about it.
think it over.
that's all l ask.
what made you quit the inner circle, if l may ask?
as opposed to the princess over there, you seem to have a sense of discretion.
you strive to judge the situation impartially,
mr. mccoy.
just answer the question.
when l joined the inner circle, they had such high ideals .
l helped them.
but the more we worked together, l started realizing that it was all a big mistake.
it's not a matter of a simple mistake!
you killed jean!
hisako!
stay right where you are.
are you awake?
don't worry, we are not the people who brought you here.
emma!
hisako.
you'll be fine, honey.
you just overslept a little.
emma, i've been waiting a long time for you.
l..
l ..
it would appear you two know each other.
yes.
hisako's parents decided it was time to call .
they asked me to be her tutor.
when she was still a young child , she manifested her powers only once.
so we've heard.
but she didn't manifest them after that, right?
true.
but because of the mutant phenomena occurring in this area recently ,
her parents thought that she may manifest her powers again.
when that happens they thought she could use someone who could teach her how to use them.
of course, they had tried calling the xavier institute, but it was shut down.
mr. lchiki heard about me through the grapevine, so they asked me to teach her.
before i joined the inner circl
i taught young mutants .
after i left them, i returned to teaching.
at that time, i was tutoring in south america and could not travel to japan.
hisako and i began our lessons long distance, through the internet and telepathy.
hi, hisako.
i'll be able to visit you in northern japan soon.
that's awesome news, miss frost
i can't wait to meet you in person!
same here.
a few days ago, l received word that hisako had gone missing.
l came to japan as soon as l could .
i thought i' d be able to reach by telepathy, but i couldn't make contact at all.
it's like this whole region is sort of a...
atelepathic dead zone.
interesting.
cerebro is also unable to scan this area.
i went to the forest where hisako had disappeared, hoping to find a trace of her, but before i knew it the u-men ambushed me.
you, who are known to be one of the inner circle' s top guns...
it's a little hard to believe you were so easily caught.
they were cyborgs, so l couldn't exactly use my telepathy on them, could l
besides, l thought if they captured me, they might lead me to hisako.
you have a tidy little answer for everything, don't you?
someone had to look for her, no one else was.
where were you?
if you x-men had been there, l wouldn't have had to look for her.
emma?
who are these people?
don't be afraid of them.
you can trust them more than anyone.
mobile weapons activated .
programming for data collection is complete.
ready to commence tactical actions.
let me show you around.
affirmative.
so, have l proven my innocence,
mr. tough guy?
i'm confused.
ask our leader.
honestly , l don't believe a word of it either.
however, our main concern right now is getting hisako out of here and back to her parents.
is it just me, or does it seem a little too quiet around here?
is it lunch time?
or are they too chicken to face us.
you just had to say something, didn't you?
isn't it time for your after-lunch workout?
storm, you're still weak from the last fight.
get emma and hisako the hell out of here!
got it.
cyclops, where are you?
beast, storm, wolverine.
what's going on?
hisako.
open your eyes.
i'm afraid you can't hide from it anymore.
you have to face reality.
emma...
why?
why does everything go hazy when l try to focus on that one part of northern japan?
and why do l see that boy so clearly ?
could it be?
could it be that...
i've got a bad feeling about this.
this feels like a setup.
should we take a different route?
you call this a route?
unfortunately , there are no elevators for celebrities like you.
signal lost x-men out of monitoring range.
data collection impossible.
crap!
leave this to me.
what's the matter?
whatever they injected us with is wearing off.
l sense the u-men somewhere nearby.
it seems there was some sort of system monitoring your abilities on that route.
what is this place?
it seems to be another operating room of some kind.
it's huge.
don't touch that
that is organ extract taken from mutants like you.
in order for us, the u-men, to have powers like mutants
we are going to harvest your organs.
you're dead, freak!
cyclops, are you all right?
you son of a...
your adamantium skeleton makes you an easy target for the electromagnet
wolverine.
we have collected all of your data .
shit!
oops!
shut it electric witch!
give me your fresh organs.
organs!
it's no use.
he's lost his mind.
my telepathy won't work.
there's some kind of interference.
cyclops, now!
follow me!
we're getting out of here!
organs!
if you want her, you'll have to go through me!
then give me your organs first
what?
hisako!
that's enough!
stay away from her!
l won't let you hurt her!
you bastard!
kid's got a mean right hook.
wow.
so those are hisako's powers.
hisako's ability is to transform psionic energy into a suit of armor around her.
hisako.
why does it hurt so much!
what's happening to me?
l can't hear anything.
l can't see anything!
emma, where have you gone?
l..
l ..
she's lost control!
it's all new to her.
and she's never generated this much power before.
emma, where are you?
somebody!
anybody!
please make it stop!
you can stop it yourself !
pretend you're riding a bike, kid!
use your brakes!
hit the brakes, kid!
someone please stop it.
cyclops!
hisako!
get it together!
you control your power, it doesn't control you!
hisako.
don't give into it!
don't let it take you over!
i'm not strong enough to make it stop!
you're strong enough, you can do this!
fight it, hisako!
it's no use!
believe, hisako!
just believe in yourself .
emma...
we're all here to help you.
we all believe in you but we can't do it for you.
this is your very first lesson.
my first lesson?
that's right.
you can do it.
i'm right beside you.
you passed.
emma...
you're an excellent student.
i'm proud of you.
emma!
this is just a gut feeling but l don't think emma was responsible for jean's death.
it's not that l doubt what you say but she is not our enemy, at least.
she's an excellent teacher.
you have to admit, cyclops.
fine, but let 's not forget...
she's a telepath...
and for all we know she could have been controlling
hisako's mind and our minds this whole damn time.
so much for our headquarters.
but on the bright side, we collected plenty of data.
x-men bastards!
let them have their fun for now.
they were just put into a deep sleep.
l see.
charles , hisako is fine.
we've freed all the young mutants.
organs!
hisako!
emma protected hisako from the laser that todd, the surviving u-man, fired.
an unusual transformation occurs in emma's body.
the x-men take emma and hisako to the xavier institute in new york and are attacked by a mysterious monster on the way.
what is the true form of the monster and the surprising truth behind emma's unusual transformation?
next x-men.:
transformation.
__file_terminal__
charles, hisako is safe now.
we have rescued all the other mutant children, as well.
organs.
organs!
hisako!
what's going on?
what's happening to me?
give me back my organs!
emma, you're transforming!
i'm transforming?
is this your first time?
what the hell is he?
we'll take care of him.
organs.
where the hell did he go?
organs.
my organs.
nobody takes those organs from...
what just happened to me?
are you okay, emma?
numbers definitely confirm the transformation.
luckily , it doesn't look that serious.
l..
emotions can sometimes trigger what causes some people to transform.
that would explain why it happened when emma was fighting to protect hisako.
however, once you've transformed, there is a greater chance that, someday, you will lose control and become a monster.
it's a disease for mutants called the damon-hall syndrome.
the damon-hall syndrome...
the transformation doesn't always cause the symptoms to appear, but you need a vaccine to treat them.
emma.
hisako!
mom!
mom.
thank you so much.
we thought that we'd lost her forever.
thank you.
mr. and mrs. lchiki, forgive me for not getting in touch with you the minute l got to japan, but...
we were delighted when mr. beast told us that you'd come.
we're just happy to know that you're safe.
we were relieved to hear that you were with hisako.
hisako!
ouch.
l was so worried about you.
i'm so happy to see you.
her best friend.
she's a mutant, too?
no, she just has a big heart.
she doesn't care if you're a mutant.
even here.
l thought everyone here hated mutants.
there won't be any more children disappearing.
words can't express our gratitude.
we're preparing a meal for you.
it shouldn't be much longer.
would you lend me a hand?
sure.
in my opinion, it's essential that we take you to new york as soon as possible.
to new york?
yes, i'd like to run full tests on you at the xavier institute.
no way.
l can't let you bring her to the institute.
there was nothing in the u-men hideout that could jam our mutant detection system.
what does that have to do with me?
it means that someone else was blocking cerebro from detecting mutant activity.
you're saying that l was responsible for that?
enough!
i've already told you.
i'm not involved with the inner circle anymore.
besides, i'm not a strong enough telepath to jam a system like that.
but your...
excuse me, lunch is ready.
cyclops, l believe emma.
look, she transformed because she was trying to protect hisako.
they say that every mutant transforms differently depending on its abilities.
all mutants are concerned about this transformation.
okay, l guess beast is right.
l will take the tests.
honestly , l still can't believe it happened to me.
but those tests can only be done in new york?
yes, and the xavier institute is the only place where we can get the vaccine that l developed for the damon-hall syndrome.
if that's the case, then i'm coming with you.
hisako!
l just began to learn how to use my powers.
i'd be completely lost if emma left now.
mr. and mrs. lchiki, would you allow hisako to accompany me to new york?
well , we...
i'd like to be with her so that l can teach her more about her powers.
moreover, there is always a possibility that she could transform, too.
l suppose it's not a bad idea to get the vaccine now.
right.
all right, then.
as long as you're with emma, okay?
i'm glad, hisako.
thank you.
me, too.
is that a problem , cyclops?
no.
do you think l can see a broadway musical while we're in new york?
well , it is a short drive to manhattan from the xavier institute.
we can certainly try to do that once we've completed emma's tests.
can we?
an unidentified object is approaching us from behind.
it passed us!
l didn't see anything.
l got this!
it's all yours!
are we going to die?
we'll be fine.
l can't hold it any longer.
hurry!
gotcha!
he is a mutant.
judging from how out of control he was, he may have transformed and developed the damon-hall syndrome.
that would be my guess.
wait, he was one of the kids from the inner circle' s mutant training academy.
what?
hey, remember me?
his body is back to normal, but he's still not fully conscious.
these are all typical symptoms of the damon-hall syndrome.
poor thing.
he was such a sweet boy when l first met him.
if l remember correctly , he said he was from northern japan.
do all mutants turn into monsters like him?
is that going to happen to me, too?
the x-men will find a way to help us.
i'm sure of it.
we'll do our best to find out why this is happening at the xavier institute.
emma frost.
hisako ichiki.
welcome to the xavier institute.
i'm professor x.
pleased to meet you, sir.
l hope you'll come to think of this as a second home.
you're both part of the family now.
thanks.
thank you, professor.
it'll take me about four or five hours to examine the boy.
i'm sure you're all tired from the trip.
why don't you get some rest?
sounds good to me.
thanks, beast.
hang in there!
oh, god.
l can't.
calm down, hisako.
what did the inner circle do to him, emma?
nothing, really.
except reinforcing his mutant powers and mind control abilities.
are you sure about that?
we didn't conduct the same type of experiments that the u-men conducted.
although, i'm not sure what happened to the mutant training academy after that battle in which jean died.
l heard that the inner circle disbanded after the battle.
he may have gone back to his hometown in northern japan.
if so, there is a good chance that he was in a u-men facility.
but when we examined his body, there was no evidence of experiments on his body.
you're right.
no experiments were conducted on him.
i've got the results from the tests on his cellular tissues.
l couldn't tell if he was at a u-men facility or not, but his transformation wasn't caused by an experiment.
it had been suddenly triggered by an unknown cause.
suddenly triggered by an unknown cause?
man, whatever it is, l have a bad feeling about this.
okay, emma.
we'll begin when you're ready.
all right.
no, no, no.
don't go in there!
hey, no cheating!
yeah!
three wins in a row, scott.
thanks!
l get free meals for the next three days now.
damn it!
one more time.
i'll bet my motorcycle.
if you wish, we can bet the blackbird.
l tried using the cerebro to detect mutant activity in northern japan, but it is still blocked out.
damn it!
okay, let 's run an mri next.
l suppose you're anxious to hear about emma, aren't you?
yes.
by the way, there is something l wanted to ask you.
sure, anything.
have you ever heard of the sasaki academy?
well , it sounds like something l might have heard, but l don't really remember anything about it.
l was little.
that's okay.
thanks anyway.
is she okay?
emma has the same x-antibody that poor boy had.
what?
then, are you saying that the same thing's gonna happen to her?
you don't have to worry about that.
he said mine is benign.
thank goodness.
you must be hungry.
we haven't eaten anything.
why don't we all go grab a bite?
yay!
just as l suspected.
both emma and the boy transformed in northern japan.
and cerebro still can't detect mutant activity.
there is still something going on in northern japan.
things aren't over for us just yet, are they?
emma and hisako became the x-men's newest members.
as the training begins, hisako sees that she still has a lot to learn about her powers.
meanwhile in order to resolve the misunderstanding between her and cyclops,
emma agrees to undergo a telepathic examination with professor x.
the x-men witness the truth that lies in emma's heart
next time on x-men.:
power.
__file_terminal__
okay, really high, really high!
that's it!
i didn't sign up for this!
let me go, you bucket of bolts!
i just started, i can't die yet!
oh, come on!
you don't really wanna do this, it's fake anyway.
it's just like my dream.
up and at 'em, kiddo.
if that had been the real thing, you'd be just a skid mark.
sorry, emma.
i really blew it.
you're still learning to use your powers, don't be so hard on yourself .
just curious, what exactly have you been teaching her?
every one of us has to come to grips with who we are, frost.
and learning the extent of her mutant powers should have been first on the list.
yeah, not to mention working on her guns.
if you misperceive that, you'll fall prey to the temptations of an evil organization.
hold on a minute!
do you mean emma?
i don't know what you think, but emma frost saved my life!
and she risked her own to do it!
you hear me?
you owe her an apology!
that's enough, hisako...
why are you always so hard on her?
is that the type of teamwork i can expect from the x-men?
she isn't a member of the x-men, and i don't owe her a damn thing.
before you criticize others, you'd better quickly prepare yourself to be a full -fledged mutant.
a full -fledged mutant?
what exactly are you?
he told you.
don't get so worked up.
the later risk of outbreak of damon-hall syndrome due to secondary mutation is quite high.
it's just like we saw in that boy.
speed up the vaccine production.
the secondary mutation is already developing in emma.
we must vaccinate her immediately .
i understand.
i'll need the team to pay another visit to northern japan to get to the bottom of this, once preparations have been made.
is that the type of teamwork i can expect from the x-men?
i've brought you all here for hisako, nothing else.
we shall welcome her as a junior member of the x-men.
no objections, i assume?
i think she'd fit in well with the x-men.
and we shall welcome emma as a member of the x-men.
she will be hisako's instructor.
what's there to argue about?
she did a hell of a job protecting hisako in japan.
how about it, emma?
i'm against it.
you still have doubts about me?
i didn't have anything to do with jean's death.
if that's so, let the professor perform a telepathic probe.
let's prove you're not lying.
i refuse.
if that's what it takes for you to believe me, i don't need to be a member.
what?
i'm not sharing my private thoughts with anybody, is that clear?
hey, has cyclops always been so nasty?
who?
scott?
he always has such a stern look on his face!
he said, "before you criticize others,
you'd better quickly prepare yourself to be a full -fledged mutant.
he's the one who goes around judging everybody!
i know emma feels bad about being part of the inner circle.
yet, isn't it just like a man to throw salt into an open wound?
scott harbors deep wounds in his heart.
he won't be rid of them easily .
even now, he's struggling to find an answer.
just like you, hisako.
i'm struggling?
if emma refuses,
i don't intend to perform a telepathic probe against her will .
thank you, charles .
scott, emma's joining us has been decided.
i will abide by your decision, but...
but?
should emma double-cross us,
i will not be responsible.
i don't think emma is tangled up in jean's death.
but, for a guy like scott, he's sure persistent in keeping an eye on emma.
if it wasn't emma, who was the woman he saw a year ago?
for a leader in the inner circl projecting my likeness would be a fairly simple matter.
do you mean mastermind?
yes.
i heard that even a year later, there's no trace of him to be found.
the inner circle have, in fact, suspended their activities.
if mastermind does live, those activities will no doubt resume.
what's wrong, scott?
hisako has been made a junior member of the x-men.
we'll begin intensive training immediately .
i'm in the x-men?
is emma joining us as hisako's trainer?
yes.
emma, too?
hisako, let 's get going!
i don't want to be taught by you.
emma's my instructor.
that doesn't cut it.
llead the x-men.
you follow my orders.
who's my training opponent?
a giant robot again?
a combat machine?
bring it on.
even frankenstein's fine.
you'll be fighting me.
what?
when you're fighting imaginary enemies, there's no real risk.
if you know in the back of your mind that there's no danger, you'll hesitate.
but...
take me as your enemy.
do not hold back, because i won't.
that kind of...
we begin.
hold on!
i can't think of you as my enemy!
what are you doing?
this is dangerous!
this isn't a joke!
sorry.
i'm not the joking type.
i think he really means it.
you!
are you really trying to kill me?
i thought i told you.
i'm not going to hold back.
stop it!
help me!
emma!
hey, hey!
i don't mind tough training, but she's still just a child !
this is overkill !
i'm stopping this.
wait.
just a little longer.
we'll be too late by then!
i know.
but...
the child hasn't yet released her true power.
help me!
please!
stop already!
cyclops!
your enemy isn't going to let up because you ask him to.
if you fall into the enemy's hands, you'll suffer the same fate as the mutants who died.
don't...
i don't want to...
you better try to overcome this situation with your own power.
no!
what the hell is he thinking?
he's trying to provoke hisako into unleashing her power.
stop it!
don't hold back your power!
hold back my power?
let go completely !
try to focus.
control your power, don't let it control you!
that son of a...
he's talking about jean.
don't come near me!
don't give in to it!
don't lose sight of yourself !
it's no good.
get back.
clear your mind!
focus your power!
hisako.
she stopped it.
nicely done.
there was nothing nice about it!
this power is turning me into a monster!
it's no use.
we've already seen what happens when symptoms of damon-hall arise.
it's only natural that she considers herself to be a ticking time bomb, a potential monster.
then, if her heart breaks, she'll be of no use to the x-men.
ororo.
hey there.
got a minute?
these powers...
like you, i didn't understand how to use them at first.
everything around me was eerie.
i was worried, very worried.
if l hadn't met charles , i don't know what would have happened.
he protected you, didn't he?
he didn't just protect me.
he showed me the way, and guided me on how to be true to myself , how to use my powers.
humans and mutants are different.
but they have one thing in common, a heart.
a heart.
the x-men are a bridge between the hearts of mutants and of men.
now, take pride in your powers and in your role as an x-man.
i want to lead a normal life.
i want to forget about my powers.
you're only running away from your future and your fate.
that's right, hisako.
that's your weakness.
if you don't learn to master it, you'll succumb to it, just as cyclops fears.
whether you want it or not, you were born a mutant.
you can't run away from your destiny.
destiny?
if you accept everything, you have to have a strong heart and toughen up.
i don't have confidence.
i'm not a confident person like emma.
i'm a weak-hearted person.
it 's no use.
come with me, hisako.
are you sure, emma?
yes, but l have one condition.
condition?
yes.
i want you to project everything you see inside my mind to the entire team.
everyone?
yes.
hisako, as well , of course.
emma.
understood.
let's begin.
this is emma as a young child .
that girl gives me the creeps.
it's like she can read your mind.
what' s worse is her icy stare.
they say she's a mutant.
mutant that' s creepy!
this is around high school.
why did your boyfriend suddenly change his mind?
it's her fault !
you're a great girl, but i can't forgive you for deceiving me with telepathy.
and emma on her 20th birthday.
miss frost is wonderful.
yes.
she's the perfect woman.
then that man appeared.
mastermind.
you're bored with human society , aren't you?
i want to provide you with the perfect place.
welcome to our inner circle.
but miss frost i think i' d like to proceed cautiously with this investment
actually, it' s a brilliant proposal.
let' s draw up the contract just like you said.
well done.
his fortune now belongs to us.
we'll ask for your help again.
not understanding the significance of her power, she made mistake after mistake, until finally , she drove a man to his death .
do you feel guilty?
the man lost all hope, and threw his own life away.
i am the one who has lost all hope.
enough of this, already.
wait are you trying to act self -righteous?
you fool
and a year ago, on this same day,
emma was with a boy who had a wounded heart
a mutant boy.
go ahead and cry.
let it all out
but someday, you'll understand the true significance of that power.
this is what happened on the day of the battle.
when jean died, emma was not there.
emma.
you innocence has been proven.
emma!
you understand now, don't you, hisako?
i may be a strong person, but i'm not a pure one.
i now see that i made mistakes and i regret them.
if i can change, so can you.
i'll be your strength.
i believe you, emma.
i'll do my best as an x-man.
i'm sorry for everything.
from now on, we're allies, aren't we, cyclops?
or should i call you scott, perhaps?
it 's cyclops.
well , nice to meet you again.
this vaccine is for all of you, of course.
distribute it to hisako's parents and to the mutants in the tohoku area.
make sure to have them all vaccinated.
we understand.
nice duds, ladies.
you both look marvelous.
i think so, too.
now that we're all here, take a look at this.
so far, here is where mysterious events thought to be mutant phenomena have occurred.
here is the center point, a remote mountain region.
most likely the causes of the mutant detection interference and the secondary mutations are to be found there.
that's correct.
investigate it thoroughly .
okay.
departure time.
here we go, hisako.
charles , is that all we should investigate?
what do you mean?
the woman, sasaki yui.
you read my thoughts.
when you performed the probe, our minds were linked.
even if you try not to see something, sometimes you do.
that's okay.
if you want to hide it, i won't pursue it any further.
yes, i was anxious about what i was hiding.
what we are attempting to go up against may be an existence beyond our imagination.
at the behest of professor x the x-men fly to northern japan once again.
with their two new members, the x-men soon find themselves facing the remnants of the u-men, hungry for revenge.
with the u-men's high-tech capabilities giving them the upper hand, the x-men find themselves fighting an uphill battle.
backed into a corner, their chances of survival appear grim.
next time on x-men.:
conflict
__file_terminal__
look at this.
this is the area where unexplained happenings, thought to be mutant phenomenon, have occurred.
l circled the area.
at the center is a remote mountainous region.
most likely the causes of the mutant detection interference and the secondary mutations are to be found there.
yes, please check thoroughly .
yes, they are coming toward us again.
but not to worry.
we can handle them this time.
l also asked my guys to come, just in case.
but l hope you guys can handle the x-men.
you bet we will.
the real part of the fight is from here, professor x.
i can imagine the look of surprise on your face.
we've been expecting you.
hisako!
what are you wearing?
cool, isn't it?
welcome home, hisako, it's so good to see you.
thanks, daddy.
well , just look at you.
l almost didn't recognize you.
you look all grown up.
you look like another person.
emma, thanks so much for looking after her.
for selecting her as a member of the x-men, even though she's a trainee.
oh, don't thank me, she did it all on her own.
she's the one who managed to survive the insane training that cyclops and wolverine put her through.
we threw everything at her but the kitchen sink.
and believe me, we've only scratched the surface of your daughter's potential
she has grown up emotionally and developed consciousness as an x-man.
she has a very bright future.
how can we ever thank you?
good for you, hisako.
l get that l still have a lot to learn, but i'm determined to give it all i've got as a member of the x-men.
to build bridges between humans and mutants.
l know you all must be tired after the long journey, but people who want the vaccine have assembled here.
by all means, let 's get started.
thank you.
oh, by the way...
what is it?
actually...
while you were in new york, the fish in the river started dying and so did many of the trees.
we've had a number of strange occurrences in the area.
and there's a bridge in the mountains that's twisted like a pretzel
people here are getting scared and think that mutants did these things.
l see.
we'll look into it right away.
beast, go ahead and get started without us.
no problem .
storm and wolverine, check out the river...
the three of us will take a look at that bridge.
it should mitigate the symptoms you've been having.
thank you, doctor.
wow,
although there are so many mutants in this one small area, it's peculiar that cerebro didn't detect them.
here's the next one, dr. mccoy.
excuse me.
this is what happened to my hand.
the second mutation...
doctor, is the vaccine effective even for this?
at the very least, it won't get any worse.
since when have you had this?
l see.
this suddenly appeared about three months ago.
yes.
well , so far, this river looks fine to me.
l smell something rotten upstream, but there is something more...
this smell is...
why is the river this color ?
l don't know.
but something's definitely not right.
yuck!
really makes me wish l didn't have these heightened senses!
what is happening?
what on earth is all this gas?
do you think people are right in assuming that mutants did this?
you cannot blame people for thinking that way.
only magneto is capable of something like this.
but it cannot be him, he is locked up.
anyway, it's much worse than we heard.
hey, cyclops, beast told me that you have a big wound in your heart.
a wound you might never totally heal from?
how did it happen?
hisako...
sometimes things happen that people would rather not talk about.
depending on their ability, some mutants may be capable of doing that to the bridge...
but we cannot conclude that a mutant is responsible.
the same thing goes for the gas fields.
in any case, there's something happening and we don't exactly know what it is.
what's more, people think mutants have done this.
well , that's it for today.
you two ladies were an enormous help .
thank you both.
any time!
totally.
l couldn't ask for a more charming pair of assistants.
we are charming, aren't we?
we better go help with dinner now.
come on, kyoko!
don't push me!
i've finished administering the anti-viral l vaccinated the mutants with signs of secondary mutations first.
but l didn't expect there to be so many...
some of them were on the verge of complete genetic degradation.
surprisingly , all of them live here, in this circle, where the mutant phenomena took place.
also, they experienced secondary mutations these last several years.
it means that there is something triggering the mutations at the center of this area.
l suppose so.
all right, then.
we'll check tomorrow morning.
we're coming up on the target zone.
emma, what is it?
that noise!
my head!
how can you stand it?
what noise?
we don't hear anything, darling.
what the hell , cyclops!
what's going on?
l don't know.
i've lost control!
can't you do something?
we've got an incoming missile!
l can't avoid it!
hang on, everyone!
we're gonna take a hit!
how's she doing?
whatever it is, it seems to be getting worse.
it seems to have started when we entered the center of the circle.
then, it has something to do with...
darn it!
what's going on?
those weird noises?
is that what you heard earlier, emma?
those weird noises?
emma?
what on earth was that what happened to the x-men?
really?
come on, storm.
can't you do something about that freaky snow?
l could if it was the weather!
that's not snow i've ever seen...
are you feeling any better, emma?
a little.
the noise has stopped.
there is something terrible happening in this area.
and it might be what's triggering the mutations.
anyway, it's not safe to return to the blackbird.
it might explode.
for now, we should leave.
the u-men.
again.
that's just great!
are you ready for round two?
stay back!
i've got him!
right back at you, you one-eyed freak.
catch!
cyclops.
next up, the freak with adamantium for bones...
what the...
there'll be nothing left but a puddle of molten metal!
wolverine!
oh, go fly a kite, weather witch!
wolverine!
i'm comin' now.
damn it.
but he must have a weak spot somewhere.
hisako!
l wasn't able to get much data on you two.
but l don't think i'll need much.
my telepathy isn't working!
you little. ..
hisako!
ouch!
the shield generator is in the top of the spinal column.
that's my target!
l have only one, but it's all yours.
get back!
i'll finish him off!
damn you all .
is everyone okay?
sure.
never better.
my shoulders are sore and stiff.
what have we here?
some sort of mutant detector...
a what?
looks like cerebro.
l thought these devices could only be found among us.
what do you mean?
we couldn't detect a mutant in this region.
there is a monster here, more dangerous than any other mutant.
gosh, we should get out of here!
even with all your powers, you cannot handle that monster.
it's surprising the u-men were developing the detection system by themselves and that they were searching for mutants.
then it wasn't the u-men, who interrupted the mutant detection.
then who is responsible?
hisako?
is she all right?
why don't you let beast carry you?
but don't fall asleep.
otherwise, you will never get to see the broadway musical
yeah, last time we didn't make it.
smells like humans.
over there.
we're lost.
and we hoped you might let us come in and warm up?
of course.
here you go.
a cup of tea ought to help warm you up.
thank you.
excuse me.
you're dr. sasaki.
yes?
yui sasaki?
that's right, the sasaki academy.
professor x was just asking me about you.
l couldn't remember very well , but you are dr. sasaki, aren't you?
i'm hisako ichiki, remember me?
little hisako?
it's incredible!
finding you way out here in the middle of nowhere!
when l was little, l attended the sasaki academy.
the sasaki academy is a school for mutants.
dr. sasaki was headmistress there.
l don't know why l couldn't remember.
that's strange.
in a building located deep in mountains, the x-men encounter a woman, yui sasaki.
emma senses that yui is hiding something in the way she acts and speaks.
meanwhil dr. sasaki contacts professor x and gives him startling news.
next time on x-men.:
betrayal.
__file_terminal__
there has been abnormal mutant activity in the tohoku area.
did you find something out?
nothing in particular.
it's jumping to conclusions to blame the twisted bridge and the strange occurrence in the river on mutants.
however, the u-men's mutant detection device found a strong signal.
l can't understand that.
but l'm surprised.
little hisako becoming a member of the x-men!
when l remembered the sasaki institute, professor x was happy, too.
charles was...
will professor x be joining you here as well?
no.
he left the investigation to us.
l see.
what exactly is this sasaki academy?
we were never as big as the xavier institute, but we took in the mutant children from the area temporarily.
so, are you also a mutant?
no.
ln that case, why?
l wanted to do something for the children who were snubbed and couldn't go to school, just because they were mutants.
but... l suppose there were limits to what l could do alone.
so you shut it down?
yes.
now l use the facility for medical and mutant research.
you know, dr. sasaki, l... l was really good friends with a kid in school.
good friends?
yeah.
l think that kid was a little younger than me.
it was a boy, but... l can't remember him no matter how hard l try.
dr. sasaki, do you remember him?
back then l had so many children here.
l really don't remember.
doctor!
it's almost time for the meeting.
these are the members of my research team.
from the left, this is koichi kaga,
jun sanada, and riko nirasaki.
and these are the x-men.
l've heard about what you've done.
it's an honor to meet you.
that's everyone?
yes.
go ahead.
excuse me.
the weather appears to be clearing.
it might be a good time to go check on the blackbird.
l'm sorry to trouble you, but could l borrow some tools?
yes.
l'll go, too.
l'm coming, too.
scott.
you talk to hisako and emma.
however...
understood.
the research facility is in the back of this house.
the main equipment is underground.
a boy...
younger than me...
hisako.
you used to go to an ordinary school, right?
yeah.
l used to come to the academy after my regular school let out.
maybe that boy was a friend of yours at school?
maybe...
by the way, yui.
aren't you an acquaintance of professor x?
yes.
it was more than 15 years ago, but l did meet him once.
more than 15 years ago?
but we were never close.
it was such a long time ago, l don't really remember.
l have to go to a meeting, so please make yourselves at home.
if you need anything, you can reach me on this intercom.
l feel like dr. sasaki's changed.
changed?
yeah.
she used to be kinder and warmer, l think.
she still seems kind, at least to me.
that's true, but...
yui sasaki is lying.
she said she hasn't seen professor x in 15 years.
but she has seen him since then.
did you read her mind?
it's because of things like that that people hate mutants.
no.
l didn't use telepathy.
this is a woman's intuition, right?
a woman's intuition?
when we mentioned the professor, she called him "charles.
even though they weren't that close.
some people use first names even with people they're not friendly with.
but she had asked you if professor x was planning on coming.
yui sasaki is involved with professor x on a much deeper level.
a deeper level...
all right, let's pull it out!
that's impossible.
l'm joking.
storm!
could you melt all this ice?
that's also impossible.
look at this snow.
l wonder if you could even call it snow.
at first glance, it seems like snow, but...
it doesn't melt.
it's not even cold.
it seems more like a mineral.
so in japan they have diamond or ruby snow?
of course not.
it's as ifjust this place was suddenly changed.
at any rate, there's nothing we can do like this.
l'll contact charles and have him send a spare blackbird.
yui sasaki?
yes, i thought i'd let you know, just in case.
understood.
ln any event, l'll send you the backup jet at once.
thank you.
it's been a while.
yui.
l wasn't expecting you to contact me.
from the sound of it, you've already heard a report about me.
i hear you've shut down the academy.
let me just state my business.
l want to continue my research here in peace.
are you saying the x-men are in the way?
l'll help if needed.
but l want them out of here as soon as the investigation is over.
would something be disturbed if they stay too long?
it may be the key to solving the string of mutant occurrences around your lab.
l have nothing to do with it.
l'm not so sure about that.
when l sent my mind to tohoku,
i saw you and a boy.
i couldn't see his face, but you overiapped with him.
does that boy have anything to do with you?
why did he enter my mind?
answer me, yui.
that boy is probably takeo.
takeo?
he's my son.
mine...
and yours.
our son?
you're telling me l have a son?
so then that was...
my son entered my consciousness.
that is incorrect.
if you say you saw him, then you just happened to look in my mind.
but i'm certain i met that boy.
you said you couldn't see his face.
that's natural.
because takeo is already gone.
what does that mean?
do you mean our son is dead?
someday l'll tell you everything.
but for now, please stop meddling in my affairs.
staying here is pointless.
ln the meantime, let's go back to the sasaki house.
an avalanche?
doesn't seem like it.
ls a mountain monster making snowmen or...
what on earth is that?
it seems that snowman has business with us.
so let's go say hello!
wait!
what's that?
storm.
there's one here, too.
greetings, ladies and gentlemen of the x-men.
how do you like japan?
it's not bad.
the food is good and the scenery's nice.
then you'll have no regrets when l kill you here!
sorry, but l haven't seen any kabuki yet.
what are you?
some kind of hedgehog monster?
beast!
did you pulverize him?
there was no resistance.
you are pretty tough.
it's about time.
what?
so that was the aim of the attack just now.
the greetings are finished.
let's meet again.
l see.
he can liquefy his body.
that's why he offered no resistance.
this is no time for analysis!
let's get out of here!
jun?
l'm going to take my shot in my room.
make sure the x-men don't see you.
be careful.
l understand.
hisako?
ls something wrong with your right hand?
the bruise on my hand is hurting.
bruise?
it used to be bigger.
do you remember an injury or a burn?
no.
mom and dad also say they don't remember it, so l thought it was just a birthmark.
it suddenly started hurting when l got here.
has it ever hurt you like this before?
l don't think so.
that's strange, l wonder if something irritated it.
l...
l'm going to ask dr. sasaki for an ointment.
hey!
she told us to use the intercom, remember?
it's all right.
it's not as if she's going outside.
but...
this is a good opportunity.
l need to talk to you.
talk?
biackbird auto-piiot engaged.
launch preparations complete.
you want me to let you read my mind?
yes.
what for?
to remove your hesitation.
my hesitation?
l heard you couldn't fight the berserk mutant at the u-men base and almost lost your life.
ls it because of jean?
the professor proved l had nothing to do with jean's death.
so what is making you suffer?
hisako also asked me. "help him," she said.
it's none of her business.
she's worried about you in her own way.
and l also don't want a leader who's so hesitant.
at this rate, it may impede our work as x-men.
face your heart.
l'm sure jean would wish for that, too.
l don't like this.
what's wrong?
yui sasaki said she introduced us to everyone in the mansion.
but l can still smell someone else in there.
indeed.
she doesn't seem to want us there.
yui sasaki's presence at the center of the mutant phenomena and the appearance of the u-men seems a bit too much for coincidence.
seems we'd better keep an eye on yui sasaki.
that's why l asked scott and emma to stay.
scott.
the x-men are a light for mutants.
i want to become that light.
and i want to continue shining a light on the future for human and mutant children.
i'm begging you, scott.
kill me.
you know i couid never do thati
you...
what did you do to jean's heart?
l love you, scott...
jean!
you are?
now you die, too.
scott.
dr. sasaki?
feeling better?
yeah.
the shadow you saw behind jean, it's natural that you'd think it was me.
l was attacked by myself.
what on earth was that?
that must have been your subconscious, the part of your mind where you can't forgive yourself for not saving jean.
l... tried to escape my inability to save jean by blaming you for her death.
you're right, the one person l can't forgive is myself.
now that l know you had nothing to do with jean's death, what should l do?
one year ago, if l'd been there when jean went berserk, l might have been able to save her.
and you, as well.
listen to me, scott.
aren't you the one who taught hisako that an x-man's most important quality is his heart?
you need a stronger heart than anyone else.
don't let jean's will go to waste.
i want to become that light.
and i...
i want to continue shining a light on the future for human and mutant children.
so now you want to coach me, just like hisako?
the beast that suddenly appeared in the lab turns out to have an unexpected identity.
amid the confusion, emma becomes suspicious of yui sasaki's assistant jun.
meanwhile, danger approaches professor x as he fiies to tohoku from new york on the blackbird.
a new facet of the case is revealed.
next time on x-men.:
lost
__file_terminal__
dr. sasaki!
it's below us.
dr. sasaki!
what is it?
what's the matter?
come on!
let's get out of here!
get behind me!
emma!
take care of those two!
not a problem!
great, so now it can fly.
cyclops, we're back.
the blackbird's not going anywhere so it looks like we're stuck.
hisako!
what is that monster?
it appears to be focusing on dr. sasaki.
as l suspected.
its genetic compounds are breaking down, just like the others.
breaking down?
okay, but how do we stop this thing?
they've been infected with a virus that attacks the mutant genome.
l've synthesized a counter agent for it, but l doubt administering it will be easy.
we need to take it alive!
but...
we have to save this one!
hisako!
come on, hisako, get it together.
be careful!
l'll try.
now would be good!
okay!
armor to the rescue!
l guess l don't know my own strength.
l only knocked it out, right?
it's riko.
it can't be.
riko.
not a fan of bugs, huh?
wasn't he supposed to be the girl's friend?
why the hell did he run off like that?
something doesn't smell right here.
fifteen minutes until destination.
it's been a iong time since i first met yui.
there was a mutant incident in japan.
on my investigative trip to tohoku,
i met yui.
she was an amazing teacher.
it didn't matter to her if a child was a mutant or not.
to her, they were all just people.
and then,
somewhere along the line, we fell in love.
and when it was time for me to go,
i asked yui to come to new york with me.
but yui said,
in the same way that you have children in new york,
i have children here
who depend on me.
you of all people should understand that, charles.
when my iife had finally calmed down enough and i couid go back and see her,
she refused to see me.
this boy you are seeing is probably takeo.
takeo?
yes, my son.
our son.
looking back, it all makes sense.
she was trying to hide our son from me.
and the boy, my boy, may very well have possessed mutant powers.
but yui said that he was gone.
someday, i will tell you.
i promise.
about my son...
and how these visions subconsciousiy appeared...
these things must have something to do with the incidents.
i need to see yui in person and get answers.
it seems to be working.
she won't wake up for a while.
l'd like to examine her further back in my lab at the institute.
although it's evident that her genetic compounds are breaking down, l still hope we're not too late.
with any luck...
doctor, if this is the first time, her syndrome might be controlled by the vaccine l developed.
yui, l'm going to administer it now.
she's in your hands.
she's no stranger to injections, apparently.
does she have a medical condition?
l'm not really sure.
she used to inject herself when she was tired.
shouldn't you be aware if one of your staff has a condition?
l try not to get involved in people's private affairs.
l'm afraid that's all l can tell you.
l was surprised to find out that it was riko.
now that we're giving her this medication, you won't have to worry anymore.
let's hope she doesn't lose control again.
right, emma?
yeah.
where the hell is kaga?
ln there!
this is riko's room.
whatever happened to that kid must have started in here.
you promised it would cure us.
how could this have happened?
found him!
hey!
open up!
if you don't open the door, l'm just gonna invite myself in.
you're a mutant, too, aren't you, kid?
l can smell it on you.
not that l'd need to.
wasn't too hard to do the math.
yes, it's true.
back when our powers were first discovered, l entered sasaki academy.
then when the academy closed,
dr. sasaki asked me to assist her in mutant research.
and since then, l've been working with riko.
and to have something like that happen to her...
what were you just injecting?
nothing.
your friend was taking the same stuff.
ls it so bad that you can't tell me?
l can't say.
not without dr. sasaki's permission.
doc's orders, huh?
yui sasaki must have told him not to say anything about it.
how about sanada?
what's his deal?
what do you mean?
ls he from the academy, too?
no, he's only been here for about nine months.
dr. sasaki hired him on because of his talent as a researcher.
and there's nobody else in the lab, right?
it's just the four of you?
correct.
well look, whatever the facts are, you should ask beast to give you the vaccine he developed at the institute.
but what about dr. sasaki?
you need a permission slip or something?
l have great faith in her.
suit yourself.
l still don't understand.
there is an unusual amount of mutants in this area.
and yet cerebro is unable to detect them.
and then there's the virus targeting the mutant genome.
as far as l can tell, this seems to be ground zero.
but why would that be?
l don't know.
l wish l had the answer, but l have no idea.
that's true.
whatever this virus is, it's beyond anything l've...
forgive me, doctor, but l find it hard to believe that someone with a background in mutant research can claim ignorance in this matter.
look at this girl!
had you told us from the beginning, we could have maybe avoided such a thing.
you have to believe me, l never dreamed that anything like this would happen to riko.
forgive me.
l'm not feeling very well at the moment.
please, excuse me.
dr. sasaki.
damn.
secondary mutation.
son of a...
we have to catch him!
with pleasure!
how could this happen?
it's koichi!
l think we found him!
dr. sasaki!
everyone, exercise extreme caution.
it's koichi kaga.
he's lost control like all the others!
l don't get it.
why isn't he ripping her to pieces already?
what's he doing with her?
look at him.
if l had to guess, l'd say he's got a thing for her.
what?
man, this is wrong.
the kid was falling all over himself around the good doctor.
l mean, he's known her since he was little.
it's not hard to understand that he admired her.
yeah, and now that he's more monster than man, he's acting on raw emotion.
okay, that's it.
l'm going in!
hisako!
that's enough.
stop this.
please, koichi.
no more!
please.
did he come to his senses?
it's too early to tell.
wolverine!
are you all right?
yeah.
so many...
he's like a brick wall!
he won't budge!
give it another go, kid!
okay!
we did it.
probably needs a nap after that.
jun sanada?
ls cyclops all right?
not really your day today, is it, bub?
it seems he's returned to normal.
we need to get him back to the medical center to be sure.
poor bastard.
the guy has every right to be crying.
dr. sasaki.
why did it happen to koichi?
l've given him the anti-viral.
just like riko, he had needle marks on his upper left arm.
are you going to tell me those are from insulin, as well?
we need to vaccinate your other assistant.
jun?
we can do that later.
l found something interesting.
some sort of liquid concentrate.
someone was stockpiling it.
there was a mini fridge full of the stuff.
dr. sasaki, are you okay?
lnteresting.
l'd say you owe us an explanation.
we are now entering japanese territory.
please enter landing coordinates.
what could that have been?
some kind of entity reached into my thoughts.
it managed to sever my psychic link with the x-men.
the anomalies in the mutant population of northern japan have all been traced back to dr. sasaki's research facility.
unfortunately, the good doctor isn't all that forthcoming.
emma has discovered the terrible truth behind yui's assistant,
jun sanada.
next time on x-men.:
reveiations.
__file_terminal__
this serum has to have something to do with riko and kaga's mutation.
the needle marks on their arms were not from ivs.
they were from injecting the serum.
what could that be?
could it be this substance that's causing the mutations?
no, in fact, it's quite the opposite.
it's formulated to inhibit dna and suppress mutant powers in order to keep mutants from getting out of control.
suppress mutant powers?
so you're saying that you knew what was happening to mutants in northern japan all along?
yes.
you lied to us?
l'm sorry.
as the results from your investigation showed, there have been many mutations here over recent years.
l have been giving this suppressant to riko and the others so that their mutant genes wouldn't be affected.
then l'm afraid the suppressant is not very effective.
l guess.
it has been less effective on riko in the last several weeks.
she's come very close to mutation a few times.
that's why l was trying to generate an even stronger suppressant.
they should get my vaccine as soon as possible.
l agree.
my question is, what were you doing here when you knew about all of this?
does your research have anything to do with the fact that this place is at the center of the mutant activity?
l can only say that my research is important for the future of humans and mutants.
dr. sasaki!
l've seen what happens to mutants who lose their minds because of the syndrome.
and it should never happen again!
the mutation phenomena are spreading quickly to a much larger area.
a secondary mutation.
and some of them have already developed the damon-haii syndrome.
even emma has...
where is emma?
l could have sworn she was here a minute ago.
that assistant of yours is gone, too.
yes.
let's find him.
he needs to be vaccinated right away!
hold on!
l can't just let you run around the facility!
we haven't finished with you yet!
you stay here.
the professor needs to know what's been going on here.
no!
please, just give me a little more time!
you've already had far too much time, if you ask me!
charles!
it's henry.
are you there?
scott.
logan.
ororo.
emma.
it's no usei something is preventing me from using my telepathic powers.
that's...
i can't stay herei if i do, i couid go insane.
i have to find a way out.
thinki
that sound.
it sounds like living creatures.
it's coming from the other side.
could it be some type of illusion that's all in my head?
only teiepaths can create such an illusion.
very powerful telepaths.
if my opponent is indeed teiepathic,
i should be able to break through this.
it's my mind against yours.
let's see who blinks firsti
there's nothing wrong with the signal.
l fear something's happened to charles.
what do you mean?
if emma were here, she could try contacting him telepathically.
there must be something very important behind those doors.
miss frost, what on earth are you doing here?
following you.
l had no idea.
a hidden elevator followed by three sets of doors requiring passwords.
that's some serious stuff.
it's a restricted area.
you're not allowed to be here.
and you are?
of course l am.
l'm part of the research team.
are you really?
you look like a young japanese man.
when my body transforms into diamond, l lose my telepathic powers.
but there's also another side effect that occurs during the transformation.
l become insusceptible to telepathic powers.
how have you been, jason?
or should l say,
mastermind?
very impressive.
but of course, fooling everyone by creating the illusion that you are sanada is an easy task when you are the leader of the inner circle.
l thought the inner circle had decided to disappear for a while.
l never imagined it would be operating deep in the mountains of japan.
l knew l should have killed you when you left the inner circle.
you walked out on us because you thought our noble cause was inconceivable and immoral.
well, l kind of knew you would someday.
emma frost.
l don't see them anywhere.
where could they be?
could they be outside?
no, l don't think so.
l can smell something over here.
you mean...
it's hollow inside.
hey, this isn't your house.
don't make a mess.
be a gentleman.
don't worry, l like the wild type.
why don't you just tell me what you are trying to do?
all right.
how can l say no to a dear old friend?
last year, l discovered the presence of mutant activity in this area, shortly after the battle with the x-men.
professor x couldn't even detect the activity.
how did you find it?
the lnner circle has many connections with this country's underground society.
one can use means other than telepathy to obtain needed information.
people talk, you know.
l see.
l suspected that there was a stronger power working behind the activity.
so you wanted to use the power for your own ambitions.
since this research lab is located at the center of the mutant activity, you used your powers to fool everyone into thinking that you are jun sanada, a member of the research team.
bingo.
as always, you catch on quickly, emma.
they trust me enough to give me access to this facility.
and now, l have discovered where the power is coming from.
so what do you think?
shall we join hands once again?
your power and beauty is more than one can ask for in a partner.
tell me one thing.
with pleasure.
ln the battle against the x-men, you created that illusion of me for cyclops to see, didn't you?
it was a shame that you had walked out on us just before the battle.
l was a little concerned that you might join the x-men after leaving us.
l thought it would be a great idea if the x-men were to kill you for me.
rumor has it that cyclops was useless for a whole year after jean grey's death.
crying over a girl's death seems pretty pathetic for a mutant, don't you think?
l hate you.
guess we're not getting back together then, huh?
what a pity.
well, well.
l love your shiny new look.
l guess your beautiful body will protect you from my psionic powers, since you can't use your telepathic powers when you're in that form.
how will you ever defeat me?
oh, that's right.
you did take some martial art lessons.
emma!
what was that?
go, don't let him get away!
sanada?
why?
that's just a disguise.
that's not sanada.
it's an illusion.
an illusion?
she's insane!
she attacked me for no reason!
she tried to kill me!
it must be the transformation!
she just went crazy!
wait a minute.
something isn't right.
my nose is picking up the scent of someone who has not yet been introduced.
l hate this smell.
actually, there is more than one smell.
there's something else behind those doors, something fishy.
do you want to tell us what's really going on?
wolverine!
logan.
jean.
protect me.
logan.
wolverine!
what the...
stop it!
what's happening to him?
it's an illusion.
he's seeing us as his enemies.
there's the man behind it.
but how...
wolverine!
stop!
now you die!
hisako!
stay back!
stop it, wolverine!
it's me!
no, hisako!
stay back!
snap out of it!
please!
hisako, stay back!
emma, you too!
beast!
we need you, fast!
what is it?
cyciops and wolverine are about to kill each otheri
what's going on?
i'm not sure, but woiverine is trying to kill us.
trying to kill you?
we have to stop him, nowi
where are you?
in the basement.
not there!
once again, he gets someone else to fight for him.
what are they doing?
l don't understand.
cyclops is trying to save his friend.
hisako, l need you to stay put, okay?
l'm going to...
little girl, you stay put, okay?
you were always stubborn, emma.
let's see if you can hold up against marsh.
have at it, marsh.
make the lady squirm.
pardon me for interrupting.
hisako!
l'm an x-men, too!
calm down, or l'm gonna have to put you down.
now, cyclops!
he gave me no choice.
damn!
no, sanada!
don't go there!
stop!
what happened?
was it a miss?
it's now or never!
jason!
l think it's about time you showed your true colors.
l've deactivated his psionic field.
you can finally see him for what he really is.
you...
from the inner circle.
mastermind.
that explains why marsh is here.
greetings, x-men.
always a pleasure.
he used his psionic powers to make you believe that you saw me a year ago.
yes, the death of jean grey.
such a terrible tragedy.
my deepest sympathies.
bastard!
stay back.
he is mine!
wait, cyclops!
that system is... l'll kill him!
no, wait!
cyclops!
ls the party over?
wolverine!
don't say anything!
good, the party's still happening.
the deadly battle continues between the x-men and the inner circle, whose members want to take control of all evil powers.
the x-men finally discover what dr. sasaki has been hiding from the world.
the wheel of fate has begun to spin, revealing its cruel yet sad truth.
next time on x-men.:
countdown
__file_terminal__
my dream will soon become a reality.
so l need my loyal men by my side.
my trusted right-hand man left me, though.
right, emma?
beast, emma, stay with dr. sasaki!
curse you!
who is he?
don't let him go in there!
that's mastermind, a member of the inner circle.
what's the inner circle?
a mutant organization whose main goal is to create a new world order, with mutants ruling over humanity.
they're evil and mastermind's their leader.
he deceived you.
made you think he was your assistant, jun.
but the whole thing was an illusion.
an illusion?
he's not jun sanada?
that's right, you better run!
wolverine!
how did l...
kaga.
hey, kaga, wake up!
what happened?
riko, how in the world did l get here?
l don't know.
l've been asking myself the same question.
l don't remember anything at all.
what happened?
it can't be.
what happened to riko, happened to me, too.
what was that?
it's my mind against yours.
we'll see who's stronger.
l'm not strong enough!
it's no use.
chariesi chariesi
charles, you can't let them down.
you have to keep fighting.
that voice!
jean?
hey, you.
you were looking a little pale.
l thought you could use a tan.
whatever.
well, you can scratch rat off our to-do list.
damn it.
l thought l had him.
yeah, well, he's out of range now, anyway.
but l still smell something rotten behind those doors.
there are three people.
no, more than that!
dr.
sasaki!
doctor, what happened here?
first, kaga and l wake up in the infirmary.
and then we find out that the laboratory's been destroyed!
it's hard to explain...
not really.
try telling them the truth.
it's her custom-made virus.
it accelerates the very mutations it's designed to prevent.
it does what?
what are you saying?
then, we...
yes.
first, riko's mutant powers went out of control, and then yours, kaga.
don't worry, you're all right now.
it's over.
l've treated you with a vaccine that l developed back at the xavier institute.
your dna is now stable.
but...
doctor, how could this happen?
l wish l knew.
we failed.
all l can do is apologize.
it can't be!
l'm so sorry.
that enormous device...
there's a similar mutant detection device at the xavier institute, but it's probably not the same thing.
lsn't this the device that's blocking cerebro and mutant detection through telepathy?
perhaps a demonstration is in order.
just as l thought.
the device detects any attempt to scan for the x-gene.
then it somehow blocks or scrambles our detection capabilities in this facility.
even for the x-men and these two,
mastermind and his mutant.
ls that just about right?
feel free to jump in at any time.
so this is what was blocking professor x and cerebro.
this thing was jamming their scanning devices.
the worst part is that you clearly knew you had something to hide.
why else would you want to black out this entire area?
you could've done something to prevent or even stop the increase in mutations and the incidents caused by the damon-hall syndrome.
l can't believe it.
why are you blocking the detection of mutants, if you're the one doing research on them?
dr.
sasaki?
did you two know what was going on?
you're mutants, for god's sake!
you just stood by and let her...
later.
we need to focus on mastermind.
now what's behind that door, doctor?
it has something to do with what mastermind told me when he stopped pretending to be jun sanada and l discovered his true identity.
wait, what are you saying about jun?
l'm confused, what do you mean?
that wasn't really jun?
you two will just have to try to catch up.
mastermind found out about the strange mutant activity occurring here last year.
after the battle with the x-men, he discovered that something very powerful is responsible for the series of mutations.
naturally, jason wasn't going to leave something like that alone.
so he came here and wormed his way into gaining dr. sasaki's confidence, hoping to find the source of this power.
and from what he told me, he did.
and now, l have discovered where the power is coming from.
what did he discover?
what is the source of this power?
listen, doctor, if you know anything about this, you better tell us.
your inhibitor no longer works because you are hiding what is responsible for the series of mutations at the back of the dome, right?
dr. sasaki...
forget it, this is a waste of time.
l say we go in.
mastermind is in there.
l will handle it!
wait!
you're right, it's in there.
the source of power.
but you don't understand...
the power itself is terrible, but what's behind it is the sweetest...
he's the reason why l began developing the inhibitor.
the one kaga and riko were taking.
so you're saying that the source of this remarkable power is a mutant?
one of the u-men told me something odd and it's all starting to make sense now.
there is a monster here, more dangerous than any other mutant.
what can be more dangerous?
he had a cerebro-like scanner that wasn't affected by the device.
l think l know why.
the u-men were working for you, weren't they?
what?
my work required mutant tissue.
l couldn't develop the viral serum without it.
the u-men got the tissue that l needed.
from a fresh organ.
and you two knew about this and did nothing?
ln return, we made the mutant detection interference device and we gave them a device to help them avoid the interference.
you knew that they were killing mutants with that device and you did nothing?
you were helping to kill mutants!
no, l can't believe it.
dr. sasaki was...
that does it, l've heard enough!
time to gather some tissue of my own!
no, wait!
please, look at it from her point of view!
yeah?
what point of view justifies working with those mutant-hating scum bags?
she wanted to keep her hands clean.
what could you do?
it was the only choice you had.
to obtain organs.
but recently, the inhibitor has not been working well and the power source hidden behind the door started to leak.
this is why you promoted the awakening of mutants in this region.
right?
instead of hiding, why didn't you contact professor x?
you two were close once, weren't you?
cut the crap.
when are you gonna tell us who you've got hidden back there?
if we have a chance at stopping him, you've got to stop wasting our time and start talking.
what could this mean?
the closer l get to those doors, the more this thing hurts.
finally, l was starting to get impatient.
we were about to begin without you.
takeo.
who's that?
he's my son.
and charles is his father.
he's charles' kid?
that's his son?
really, your own child...
we didn't know!
we thought he was just a patient!
not dr. sasaki's son!
l bet the professor doesn't even know about him.
he didn't.
not until l told him shortly after you arrived.
there was a mutant incident in this area once and professor x came.
love was in the air.
cue the violins.
l checked everything.
that man...
the person you thought to be jun sanada was, in fact, mastermind.
he was jun?
that time, she built a school for young mutants and dreamed of giving them a good education.
but then her own son started showing that he didn't fall too far from the x-tree.
she began seeking a cure for what she called the, "mutant condition.
luckily, she had two mutants with her.
her dutiful lab assistants.
she came upon the idea of a custom virus that would eradicate the mutant part of our dna.
right, kaga and riko?
but our research didn't progress as well as we expected.
the doctor discovered that fresh mutant organs were the key to saving her dear son.
knowing that the u-men hate mutants just as much as they enjoy murder, she hired them to do her dirty work.
you know, you make me sick.
what she didn't know was that the u-men are cooperating with the inner circle.
since when did the u-men decide to start cooperating with mutants?
maybe because she knew that she could kill more mutants by collaborating with us.
that's why she accepted to work with the inner circle.
but little takeo here, is what's important.
the first omega-level mutant since the late jean grey.
all we needed was someone like takeo to change this world as it should be.
a world ruled by mutants.
so we haven't given takeo any inhibitors over the last months.
what have you done to him?
thanks to you, l've had months to work on his mind, breaking it down little by little.
all this time, behind our backs...
you monster!
now, here's a real monster.
neuron.
he's the white bishop of the inner circle.
watch out!
no!
what the hell?
they're both dead.
what?
no!
kaga!
riko!
what have you done?
they're dead because l shocked them.
they were gonna die, anyway.
l have this wonderful way of showing people what pain feels like.
what did you just say?
he can override a person's neural pathways using his powers, don't forget.
l can crank up all your senses to levels you've never dreamed of.
l'll make the sound of a pin dropping a mile away so loud, it'll burst your eardrums.
or even better, give you a teeny little pinch so painful that you die from electric shock.
yeah?
pinch this, jackass.
warning.
unstable descent trajectory.
danger of impact.
now, enough moping around, takeo, let's get this party started.
come on!
no, don't!
go on.
bring an end to all your misery and release the power raging within you.
takeo!
my hand!
why is it...
what's going on?
good lord!
what is that?
it's gotta be those damn mutants again!
can you feel it?
it barely started and the earth is already trembling.
if you value your friends' lives, you won't interrupt.
besides, where are your manners?
the boy is just getting started.
as mastermind gets closer to dominating the world, he holds the x-men captive, while unleashing takeo's power.
when professor x and yui sasaki's child, takeo, destroys the facility and escapes, the countdown to world destruction begins.
but can takeo's mother and father, dr. sasaki and professor x, even control this power?
next time on x-men.:
revenge.
__file_terminal__
if you value your friends' lives, don't move.
you just sit back and watch.
l need to give undivided attention to what l'm doing.
don't try to resist.
can't you tell there's nothing you can do?
l've already felt this heat and pain before.
takeo!
takeo?
l remember you now!
hisako, do you know him?
he was at the sasaki institute!
we used to play together.
he was my friend.
takeo, don't!
if you release your powers, the world will be destroyed!
the world will be destroyed?
what are you talking about?
takeo's power can twist and distort everything around him.
distort everything?
correct.
he doesn't just twist solids or liquids.
he alters dimensions, as well.
even dimensions?
all laws governing matter and energy on earth will cease to function.
what are you doing?
can't you see you are hurting takeo?
l'm causing him pain through my illusion.
what are you saying?
if you no longer want to feel pain, takeo, destroy everything around you!
don't, takeo!
dr. sasaki was also crying that day.
the only enemies left are hisako and takeo!
mom, l...
l...
takeo.
it hurt so much.
everyone was in pain and crying.
how could l forget?
omega-level telepaths can erase their existence from other people's memories.
particularly, if he's inherited charles' blood.
so takeo...
takeo thought that he had become a monster because he hurt his friends.
he wanted to forget his own existence.
so he subconsciously erased himself from the hearts of others.
takeo must have been so hurt.
his power hurt his friends.
so he went so far as to make us forget about him.
l decided to close the institute after that.
l hid takeo from the eyes of the world and desperately researched his abilities.
l only wanted to protect him.
why didn't you ask us or professor x for help?
takeo...
he...
his father, charles, who had brought him into this world...
and his mother...
me...
have you finished confessing?
altitude.: 2,000 meters and faiiing.
charles.
jean, is that you?
your children are in danger.
protect the future of mutants.
charles.
altitude.: 1, 800 meters.
was that an illusion?
or perhaps...
real or not, l can't afford to sleep.
lsn't that right, jean?
no, takeo!
you mustn't release your power!
what a waste that would be!
how can you lock away such magnificent power?
bravo, takeo!
this is an omega-level power!
with you, taking over the world will be easy!
i won't forgive himi
takeo hurt the people around him, but it was nothing compared to the pain he had to sufferi
he's been compieteiy alone.
aii because of his poweri
if you're going to abuse that power... l won't forgive you!
damn you!
useless.
new kid's doing all the work.
us veterans can't put up such a pathetic show!
yes, l concur.
we'll need to do something about his sensory amplification power.
our nervous systems can't take much more of this.
takeo!
hisako, l'm going to take care of this man!
cyclops!
can you really do it?
hisako!
get down!
jean.
jean, what's going on?
why is everyone like this?
it's your fault.
my fault?
because you didn't shoot me a year ago.
because l didn't shoot...
this is the future that you created for mutants.
that's...
it's all your fault.
cyclops!
this is bad!
he's being sucked into the illusion!
emma!
break the illusion!
l can't!
not in diamond form.
my telepathic powers won't work!
and if l revert back to normal, he could harness my power to create an even more powerful illusion!
very astute of you, emma.
then we'll have to take him out first!
what is this?
takeo.
emma!
hisako!
this is the future l created for mutants?
yes, it's your fault.
it's your fault.
all your fault.
stop!
this is bad, beast.
as soon as he makes a move, hit me!
hit me!
as hard as you can!
what do you mean?
that's the only way we can break this sadist's power!
l'll break my limits!
but, logan, if you do that, then...
just do as l say!
come and get me!
l don't know what's on your mind, but l'll do as you wish!
now!
wolverine!
keep hitting me!
so foolish.
what!
has this guy lost all sensation of pain?
you monster!
you bastard!
he did it!
stop it!
wolverine!
that's enough, wolverine!
wolverine!
get a hold of yourself, wolverine!
logan!
hey, there.
was that a secondary mutation?
the damon-hall syndrome is something else.
should l vaccinate you again?
even a hundred shots wouldn't do it.
that took a lot out of me.
x-men, l'll have you all die here.
starting with your leader.
cyclops!
open your eyes!
cyclops!
the future you wanted was filled with despair!
now, you too shall sleep in despair.
jean!
who are you?
jean?
shoot!
that's...
this is just like the last time!
shoot.
stop, cyclops!
l can't shoot!
shoot.
no!
don't shoot, cyclops!
cyclops!
please, shoot.
don't, cyclops!
stop!
shoot.
cyclops!
l...
don't shoot!
cyclops!
fire!
scott!
jean.
cyclops!
yeah!
that's impossible!
why did my illusion break?
jean, l think l always felt guilty for not shooting when you were in pain.
even though you begged me to shoot you that day.
you showed me the way, even in an illusion.
l'll never be as good as you.
but l'm ready.
l can finally say goodbye to you.
don't celebrate just yet.
all you did was break my illusion.
l still have takeo!
what's this?
nonsense!
this power is for me to...
l'm going to...
stop!
stop it!
takeo!
don't go too close!
it's falling apart!
everyone get outside!
what's that?
unusual turbulence detected ahead.
danger.
l'm breaking through.
if that immense power spreads throughout the world...
it will cause mass destruction.
we gotta stop him here.
are you going to attack takeo?
stop!
don't hurt takeo!
at this rate, more and more people will suffer.
takeo will be hurt in the end.
l know you understand.
now, l understand.
what was that?
it's takeo's power.
it's destroying the world.
l'm attacking!
disperse!
l can't do it!
go with yui!
my head...
charles.
the world is hurtling towards its demise.
and the x-men cannot stop it.
they are defeated, one by one.
in a cruel twist of fate, a father is pitted against his son.
how will it end?
and what will become of the future?
next time on x-men.:
destiny
__file_terminal__
so he is the cause of this calamity?
professor x.
the world is facing destruction.
fellow mutants...
i am professor x of the x-men.
the abnormal phenomena you face now are occurring all over the world.
your power is needed now.
both those with power and those without must band tightly together.
no differences or discrimination exists between the inhabitants of this earth.
all are one.
charles!
that child...
takeo...
he's your child!
l thought my son was no longer in this world.
a father cannot fight his own son!
that's absolutely wrong!
dr. sasaki!
takeo!
stop this now!
no one is trying to hurt you anymore!
doctor!
you idiot!
wolverine!
my lightning...
it should be impossible to freeze electricity!
don't do it, emma!
your mind will be destroyed!
lmpossible!
l should be immune to my own blasts!
so that is takeo's ability...
the power to bend and twist everything.
takeo!
stop!
please, stop!
takeo!
stop!
takeo.
takeo, you're a kind person.
hisako...
stop it!
wait!
charles!
l have to kill him.
the professor's attempted probe was deflected!
normal rules don't apply to the composition of takeo's mind.
it has incredible power.
he made it in.
takeo.
now!
while professor x is in his mind, we'll destroy takeo's body!
cyclops, stop!
hisako!
takeo can't move right now!
you can't attack him like that!
and if takeo dies...
charles dies, too.
if takeo's power goes wild, the world will be completely destroyed!
but...
hisako!
l want to empathize with your feelings for your friend.
but l have to agree with cyclops this time!
we have to do it to protect the world.
ls that really true?
ls that really the only way to save the world?
if takeo dies, will that really solve everything?
hisako.
this is a painful decision for cyclops as well.
takeo.
control your power.
your incredible power will cause sorrow to the world, and most importantly, to you.
l will give you all the guidance l can.
now come.
do you hate me that much?
do you reject me, your father?
this is bad!
are you telling me to give up?
if l lose here, the world will end.
l cannot allow my only son to be the destroyer of this world.
stand, x-men.
jean.
so even i eventually die and get a tearful reunion with jean?
you must not give up.
for the sake of mutants and humans of this world, you must not give up.
that's right.
right now, mutants and humans are rising up against this threat together.
was that an illusion?
no, it was jean.
that's right.
we cannot allow ourselves to be defeated here.
we cannot allow takeo to use his power any more.
jean, i now understand why you...
sacrificed yourself back then.
it was to protect your friends and the world.
emma?
you're planning on diving into takeo's body and blasting him, aren't you?
if you do that, even you won't escape unscathed.
emma.
let me go.
l don't want to.
what did you say?
didn't jean leave the future of humanity and mutants in your hands?
even if it's painful, you need to grit your teeth, stay alive and fulfill her wish.
wasn't that jean's wish?
takeo, will you not let me accept your...
hatred and pain?
ls it impossible for me, takeo?
l have no choice but to shut down takeo's mind.
charles is trying to end it all by shutting down takeo's mind!
that's horrible!
charles intends to disappear along with takeo's mind.
what did you say?
charles!
what foolish thing is he doing?
dr. sasaki!
takeo, if you want to take someone with you, take me!
take mommy with you!
l won't let you go alone.
l'll share your pain.
you can't!
this is definitely wrong!
hisako.
l won't let it end this way!
takeo, it's me, hisako.
you remember this burn, don't you?
yeah, it's a painful memory, isn't it?
but we had wonderful memories too, didn't we?
so, so many...
so many!
emma!
takeo, you can stop now.
you don't have to suffer.
please, don't suffer anymore!
takeo.
her form changed?
what a beautiful light...
you came to meet me?
you wanted me to save you?
and l didn't realize that or understand you at all...
dad.
takeo.
forgive me.
takeo.
mom.
l thought l would have to do this someday.
even though it was for takeo, l worked with the u-men and collaborated in the mutant hunting.
l've hurt many people.
it's not something l can atone with death.
nevertheless... l'm sorry, charles.
you can't!
takeo.
thank you.
yui, this is what takeo wants from us.
even if it hurts we must live, and hold on to each other.
that is takeo's wish.
goodbye, takeo.
he had no symptoms of mutation at birth.
the first manifestation of his power was when hisako and the other children saw it.
when you came to tohoku eight years ago, takeo's power was awakened.
just being born my son gave him great power.
and moreover, for myself to awaken it...
even though l have raised so many mutant children as my own, l killed my own son with my own hands.
yet he was smiling at the end.
we should be grateful to hisako.
l...
even though the world is harsh, we must stand and face it head on in order to bridge the gap between humans and mutants.
even though there are people like mastermind and the now imprisoned magneto...
all magneto can do now is stare at the chessboard in his cell.
love and friendship can defeat the powers of evil.
you have taught me this.
cyclops...
this is for you.
this is...
we are friends who trust each other.
that is your proof.
thank you, scott!
hey!
but you know, l learned a lot from emma.
maybe you should take lessons from emma, too?
sounds like you have a lot to learn, scott.
by the way, our ride home is burnt to a crisp...
now what do we do?
oh, dear...
__file_terminal__
jean.
jean!
jean, don't let it take you over!
fight it!
professor x, she's no longer in control of herself .
charles:
she's under mind control .
she's not responding to my telepathic calls .
it must be the work of mastermind.
it's dangerous out there.
jean's an omega-level mutant.
damn!
if she goes supernova, we're all dead.
damn!
jean!
wait, cyclops!
cyclops:
jean!
jean, don't do this.
cyclops.
jean?
scott, it has to be done.
you have to kill me.
you know l could never do that!
l can feel it taking over.
i'll end up killing you and others.
don't let them control you!
you can fight them!
you can do it!
l believe in you!
i'm sorry, l can't.
yes, you can!
that's just mastermind talking!
jean, l love you!
you're the one controlling her mind!
jean, what are you doing?
what's happening to her body?
damn!
she's going to self -destruct!
we need to leave!
you have to fight it!
jean, stop!
l love you, scott.
jean!
charles:
in the course of evolution, accidents can occur.
we who are born with the "x-gene" have a gift
but those gifts also led to our kind being ostracized by the rest of humanity .
i created the xavier institut and hoped that it would give young mutants a place where they could be themselves.
a place to learn about their powers without fear of persecution.
in order to make the world a better place for mutants and humans alike.
ateam of elite mutants .
the x-men.
but look at us now.
it's been nearly a year since they tried to destroy us.
nearly a year since they almost succeeded.
an intense fight broke out between us and the inner circl a group of outlaw mutants .
that day, we lost one of our best and brightest
a member of our family .
jean grey.
what is it, children?
now, come here, everyone.
you're afraid, l understand.
but please, don't worry.
as long as you're here, the teachers and l will do everything to protect you.
that goes for you too.
you are...
wait!
l can't read your thoughts.
wait, who are you?
the same dream.
again and again.
who's there?
who is it?
charles:
as you know, the institute is inactive for the time being.
when did this happen?
right, l see.
in that case, we'll be glad to help you as much as we can.
goodbye.
pirates!
a gang of pirates!
we're all gonna die.
that's how these things always end!
storm:
everyone, please, step back.
man:
and you are?
they're gone now.
that was amazing!
man:
thank you so much.
you're one of those x-men, aren't you?
maybe.
excuse me.
beast:
according to my research, it is evidently possible to enhance the intelligence level of this creature to that of a human.
this is a decapodiform cephalopod, of the mollusca family .
in short, a squid.
we can communicate with him using this waterproof wireless microphone.
is he serious?
l have to see this.
i'm afraid l must leave early .
mr. devilfish will finish my lecture for me.
that squid's gonna finish his lecture?
calm down, everyone.
now, where were we?
yes, the neurological aspects of cognitive intelligence.
any questions?
wolverine:
come on!
woman:
sir, do you have any more metal objects?
listen, you're not gonna find anything on me!
trust me.
but the machine is detecting metal
l can't take these off.
okay, now you've seen them.
are we good?
well , l ..
change of plans.
looks like i'm headed to new york.
hello, charles !
welcome home, ororo.
i've missed you.
you know, some of us have things to do.
l had to cancel my vacation.
so how's it going, charles ?
still bald , l see.
logan, welcome.
l can't tell you how happy l was to get your call .
between faculty meetings and dining hall food, being a professor can get rather dull .
it's good to have you all back again.
where's cyclops?
it would seem he's not quite ready to return to us yet.
last week, a teenage girl named hisako ichiki, who lives in northern japan, disappeared on her way home from school
unable to find any clues, her parents contacted me for help .
if they called you, charles , then does that mean the girl is...
one of us, yes.
though she only exhibited her powers once, when she was very young.
once?
that's unusual
her father is an old friend of mine.
while the x-gene runs in her family , neither her father nor her mother has it.
they fear that her disappearance might have something to do with them.
probably a runaway.
why don't we just let the cops handle it?
the problem is, they began investigating, but inexplicable accidents injured many of them.
so that's why no progress has been made.
the obvious inference being that someone doesn't want this girl found.
someone who's hunting mutants?
recently , there have been many incidents involving mutants in northern japan.
but even cerebro could not detect any mutant activity there.
big deal your brilliant gizmo's probably just got a worn out doohickey or something.
and you aren't getting any younger yourself , charlle.
logan!
just kidding.
take it easy.
beast:
professor,
cerebro might have a flaw.
i'll look into it.
anyways, l believe there could be a bigger problem behind her disappearance.
so l want the x-men to go to japan and find this girl l agree that something has to be done, charles .
but what about scott?
we're not the x-men without cyclops.
unbellevable.
don't tell me you've been hanging out here this whole time.
where do you wash yourself ?
there's nothing wrong with cerebro.
all mutant activity shows up clearly .
only tohoku comes up blank.
l knew it wasn't broken.
perhaps something or someone is cloaking the area, preventing it from being scanned.
whatever it is, it may be connected with hisako's disappearance.
well , we'll find out soon enough once we get to japan.
by the way, was it wise to send logan to bring back cyclops?
that's why l sent ororo along with him.
cyclops:
l can't fight anymore.
you need a reason to fight, and i've lost mine.
storm:
no, scott.
this is not a fight.
we'll just find this mutant girl and rescue her.
and if some bad guys try to stop us, we're gonna have to fight them.
wolverine!
come on.
listen to him, will you?
full of self -pity.
he'd be useless to us anyway.
he acts like he owns her.
as if jean meant nothing to the rest of us!
jean would die all over again if she saw the way you're acting.
wolverine!
that's not funny!
what did l do?
hit a nerve?
you wanna feel real pain?
say her name again.
bring it on.
storm:
that's enough!
why do you have to pretend that you don't care?
is it that hard to admit that you've been worried about him, too?
scott, we have to find her.
she's out there.
there are still people that need you.
the x-men need you.
you know it's what jean would have wanted.
well , you know where we'll be.
jean:
so beautiful so far away.
they shine down on every living thing on earth.
on humans, and on mutants.
scott, the x-men are the light shining down on all mutants.
l want to be the light that shines down on all children, mutants and humans.
what is it?
i'd recognize that smell anywhere.
well , well , if it isn't summers,
the guy who brought shoulder pads and tights back in fashion.
we're on a mission, wolverine.
call me cyclops.
the x-men have received a call for help .
there's a young girl in japan who desperately needs us.
welcome back, cyclops.
it's been a year since you've driven this.
are you sure you're okay?
at least l do a better job than the way you handle your bike.
narrator:
with cyclops back on board, the x-men go to tohoku, a region of japan.
their investigation uncovers that hisako is not the only mutant who has disappeared.
a highly scientific group of mutant hunters, the u-men, stand in their way.
as the x-men infiitrat their hide-out they uncover a horrifying secret
next time on x-men.:
u-men.
__file_terminal__
electronic voice:
flying object confirmed.
mutant signal detected.
it's the x-men's blackbird.
they are approaching this location.
the x-men...
they've finally made a move.
activate anti-x-men weaponry.
cyclops:
we've entered tohoku's airspace.
i'm starting the descent
we should be landing at the lchiki household in about 30 minutes.
roger that.
so that's the upgraded portable cerebro, huh?
yes.
i've enhanced it so that even non-telepaths can detect mutants.
l see you're checking it right away.
you also suspect charles of losing his skills?
i'm just devoted to the mission.
sure, sure.
mastermind:
l see they've come.
man:
please don't worry.
with our technology, we have nothing to fear from the x-men.
i'm looking forward to it.
good.
someday, professor x, i'll have you visit, too...
hisako's father:
yes.
this is where we found hisako's backpack.
hisako's mother:
if only we'd walked her to the bus stop...
our car had broken down that day.
but she had an important test, so we let her take the bus.
she came home with the other kids in the evening, but walked home alone from the stop.
and here...
did you always pick her up?
yes.
other children have gone missing, so...
other children?
hisako's father:
more than 20 young mutants have disappeared in the past few years.
but the actual number is higher.
most people didn't want to make their child 's disappearance public.
but, why keep it a secret?
unexplained accidents are common lately.
many people suspect they are caused by mutants.
so people are afraid of being looked at oddly or discriminated against...
will the day ever come when people understand mutants?
cyclops:
the number of people who have gone missing is significant.
beast:
l guess it may be a case of mutant hunting, after all.
wolverine:
then it's probably the u-men.
l heard a rumor they've been hanging around japan lately.
the u-men?
they misuse mutant abilities to try and destroy humanity.
they're an organization of mad scientists.
that was mr. fujiwara!
his grandson's gone missing!
oh, honey...
he disappeared while on a delivery for the liquor store where he works.
is the boy also...
he's from a mutant family.
we're going to check out his workplace.
you guys handle the fujiwaras.
yes.
we'll meet up later.
yeah, this is the kid.
you're positive?
yeah.
but it was two weeks ago, not yesterday.
what?
see, there's a restaurant at the foot of that mountain.
he didn't come back.
that's the last l heard of him.
l only found out later, but apparently he was a mutant.
what did they do this time?
they use their powers for nothing but accidents and disasters.
wait, you guys aren't mutants, are you?
and if we are?
wolverine, cut it out.
l didn't mean anything by it... l have to make a delivery, so...
thanks for your time.
man, what are they sniffing around here for?
it's so creepy.
cyclops:
what we've done for mutants...
has it gotten us anywhere?
what did jean die for?
a restaurant at the foot of the mountain?
cyclops:
a high school student delivered something there just before he vanished.
i'm going ahead.
beast:
scott... lt wasn't fujiwara's grandpa who called the lchikis.
what?
they were so worried about what people would think, they kept it a secret.
from the lchikis, too.
that call was a trap to lure us out.
bring it on!
they're here already, huh.
so the u-men have finally made something decent.
what makes you so sure it's the u-men?
l fought an older version of these bots once.
they were kid's toys in comparison, though.
do something, cyclops!
i'm on it!
the x-men...
i'm worried about scott and logan.
let's worry about ourselves for now.
you're right.
are you all right, storm?
yes, barely.
cyclops!
you're getting in too deep!
you're going to get killed.
cyclops:
these people...
as long as they're around, the senseless attacks on mutants won't stop.
what are you charging in for?
don't be so reckless!
they're coming!
wolverine:
looks like we finished them off, cyclops.
l understand how you feel, but had l not been watching, it could have been worse.
get a grip.
l don't need your advice.
let's go.
electronic voice:
the mobile unit has been annihilated.
whatever.
it's within range of what l expected.
we gathered data.
begin analyzing the x-men's abilities and developing new countermeasures.
leave it to me.
our science will bring them to their knees.
charles:
the u-men?
are you sure?
beast:
logan confirmed it from the weapons that attacked us.
the mutant detection jamming, the case of hisako ichiki and the disappearance of mutants in this area all seem to be their work.
the u-men, homo sapiens supremacists, harvest mutant organs and steal mutant powers in order to fight evenly with mutants.
it's definitely possible.
we're on our way to meet with scott and logan and infiltrate the enemy base.
charles:
please be careful.
this looks like it'll be a tough battle...
automated voice:
the sasaki institute has been closed.
unable to connect
wolverine:
an abandoned hospital?
storm:
yes.
a specialized medical facility.
it was closed 20 years ago.
the people nearby are afraid and steer clear of it
huh.
sounds like the perfect place for their hq.
l can't sense anyone.
don't let your guard down.
it may be a trap.
l wouldn't mind.
what was that?
lt...
it hurts...
help...
help me... lt hurts!
it's the delivery boy who went missing!
cyclops, wait!
wolverine:
cyclops!
what are you doing?
focus!
wolverine, stop!
he's a mutant!
but, if he's been modified this much...
the scanner's readings are so far past the limit, it can't calculate it.
i'm sorry, but he's too far gone.
we can't save him.
but...
storm:
cyclops!
l feel sorry for him, but all we can do is put an end to his pain!
storm!
stop!
stop it!
get a hold of yourself !
do it now!
cyclops!
l feel better.
thank you.
save them...
my friends are still in...
there.
what on earth are the u-men trying to accomplish here?
what meaning does a fight like this have?
mutants killing each other...
you bastard, do you want jean's death to be for nothing?
like you could ever understand how l feel!
sometimes you have to harden your heart!
as x-men, such is our fate!
especially if you are the leader!
let's go.
let's hurry.
storm, are you okay?
yes.
what is this facility?
looks like a chemical laboratory or something.
this girl's... lt's hisako ichiki!
what?
there's a woman sleeping here, too.
cyclops:
why...
why?
why is she here?
narrator:
the mutant telepath , emma, was imprisoned with hisako.
she claims she's there to help hisako, as her teacher, but the x-men have their doubts.
that' s when todd, a leading mad scientist for the u-men, attacks.
and in the fierce battle that follows,
hisako's mutant powers awaken.
next time on x-men.:
armor.
__file_terminal__
beast:
the infamous miss frost.
storm:
emma frost.
one of the four leaders of the inner circle.
their white queen.
we should be careful, she's an extremely powerful telepath.
why is she sleeping in the u-men hideout?
cyclops:
you...
what the hell are you doing to jean's mind?
wolverine:
jean's mind?
what the hell does that mean?
cyclops:
the person who was manipulating jean's mind was...
emma frost!
what did you say?
emma was the one manipulating jean when jean transformed into phoenix.
wait.
hold on, we were there too.
why didn't any of us see her?
l was right there.
and l saw her, make no mistake!
l tried desperately to talk some sense into her.
then that woman murdered jean.
wolverine, don't be ridiculous.
we know what happened, jean took her own life.
she sacrificed herself for us and for the world .
who's to say this girl didn't put that idea in her head?
she's a telepath, isn't she?
what the hell are you doing?
now is not the time.
we came here to find a missing girl, not to avenge jean...
who says!
when the time comes, i'll be the one to do it.
beast:
attacking her while she sleeps wouldn't exactly be fair, now would it?
stop playing around!
this woman murdered jean.
if you say so, do whatever you like then.
but do you want to be a coward and act like the members of the inner circle?
todd:
they will steal the young mutant organs that we made so much effort to acquire.
let' s attack them now!
patience, doctor.
it's not every day the x-men deliver themselves to our doorstep.
let's not waste the opportunity.
continue collecting your data.
how much damned data do we need!
our opponents are the x-men.
they may still be concealing their true abilities.
nothing is more important in battle than data, data, data.
lock up the room with the mutants .
understood.
emma:
jean grey?
what are you talking about?
wolverine:
you manipulated people with your telepathy and drove them to suicide.
answer me!
l know about your battle with the inner circle.
it was one year ago.
but, l had already left them by then.
left them?
l was not part of the attack.
i'm not crazy.
l saw you there, right before jean died.
l don't know who or what you saw, but it wasn't me.
you're mistaken!
even though you say that... l can't take your word for it, you were a member of the inner circle.
emma:
l didn't tell you to take my word for it.
just think about it.
think it over.
that's all l ask.
what made you quit the inner circle, if l may ask?
as opposed to the princess over there, you seem to have a sense of discretion.
you strive to judge the situation impartially,
mr. mccoy.
just answer the question.
when l joined the inner circle, they had such high ideals .
l helped them.
but the more we worked together, l started realizing that it was all a big mistake.
it's not a matter of a simple mistake!
you killed jean!
hisako!
stay right where you are.
storm:
are you awake?
don't worry, we are not the people who brought you here.
emma!
hisako.
you'll be fine, honey.
you just overslept a little.
emma, i've been waiting a long time for you.
l ..
it would appear you two know each other.
yes.
hisako's parents decided it was time to call .
they asked me to be her tutor.
when she was still a young child , she manifested her powers only once.
so we've heard.
but she didn't manifest them after that, right?
true.
but because of the mutant phenomena occurring in this area recently ,
her parents thought that she may manifest her powers again.
when that happens they thought she could use someone who could teach her how to use them.
of course, they had tried calling the xavier institute, but it was shut down.
mr. lchiki heard about me through the grapevine, so they asked me to teach her.
before i joined the inner circl
i taught young mutants .
after i left them, i returned to teaching.
at that time, i was tutoring in south america and could not travel to japan.
hisako and i began our lessons long distance, through the internet and telepathy.
hi, hisako.
i'll be able to visit you in northern japan soon.
that' s awesome news, miss frost
i can't wait to meet you in person!
same here.
a few days ago, l received word that hisako had gone missing.
l came to japan as soon as l could .
i thought i' d be able to reach by telepathy, but i couldn't make contact at all.
it's like this whole region is sort of a...
atelepathic dead zone.
beast:
interesting.
cerebro is also unable to scan this area.
i went to the forest where hisako had disappeared, hoping to find a trace of her, but before i knew it the u-men ambushed me.
cyclops:
you, who are known to be one of the inner circle' s top guns...
it's a little hard to believe you were so easily caught.
emma:
they were cyborgs, so l couldn't exactly use my telepathy on them, could l
besides, l thought if they captured me, they might lead me to hisako.
wolverine:
you have a tidy little answer for everything, don't you?
someone had to look for her, no one else was.
where were you?
if you x-men had been there, l wouldn't have had to look for her.
emma?
who are these people?
don't be afraid of them.
you can trust them more than anyone.
mobile weapons activated .
programming for data collection is complete.
ready to commence tactical actions.
let me show you around.
affirmative.
so, have l proven my innocence,
mr. tough guy?
i'm confused.
ask our leader.
honestly , l don't believe a word of it either.
however, our main concern right now is getting hisako out of here and back to her parents.
is it just me, or does it seem a little too quiet around here?
is it lunch time?
or are they too chicken to face us.
you just had to say something, didn't you?
isn't it time for your after-lunch workout?
storm, you're still weak from the last fight.
get emma and hisako the hell out of here!
got it.
charles:
cyclops, where are you?
beast, storm, wolverine.
what's going on?
hisako.
open your eyes.
i'm afraid you can't hide from it anymore.
you have to face reality.
emma...
why?
why does everything go hazy when l try to focus on that one part of northern japan?
and why do l see that boy so clearly ?
could it be?
could it be that...
wolverine:
i've got a bad feeling about this.
this feels like a setup.
should we take a different route?
storm:
you call this a route?
unfortunately , there are no elevators for celebrities like you.
signal lost x-men out of monitoring range.
data collection impossible.
crap!
leave this to me.
what's the matter?
whatever they injected us with is wearing off.
l sense the u-men somewhere nearby.
it seems there was some sort of system monitoring your abilities on that route.
hisako:
what is this place?
beast:
it seems to be another operating room of some kind.
wolverine:
it 's huge.
don't touch that
that is organ extract taken from mutants like you.
in order for us, the u-men, to have powers like mutants
we are going to harvest your organs.
you're dead, freak!
cyclops, are you all right?
you son of a...
your adamantium skeleton makes you an easy target for the electromagnet
wolverine.
we have collected all of your data .
shit!
oops!
shut it electric witch!
give me your fresh organs.
organs!
it's no use.
he's lost his mind.
my telepathy won't work.
there's some kind of interference.
cyclops, now!
follow me!
we're getting out of here!
organs!
if you want her, you'll have to go through me!
then give me your organs first!
what?
hisako!
that's enough!
stay away from her!
l won't let you hurt her!
you bastard!
beast:
kid's got a mean right hook.
storm:
wow.
so those are hisako's powers.
hisako's ability is to transform psionic energy into a suit of armor around her.
hisako.
why does it hurt so much!
what's happening to me?
l can't hear anything.
l can't see anything!
emma, where have you gone?
l..
l ..
she's lost control!
it's all new to her.
and she's never generated this much power before.
emma, where are you?
somebody!
anybody!
please make it stop!
you can stop it yourself !
pretend you're riding a bike, kid!
use your brakes!
hit the brakes, kid!
someone please stop it.
cyclops!
hisako!
get it together!
you control your power, it doesn't control you!
hisako.
don't give into it!
don't let it take you over!
i'm not strong enough to make it stop!
you're strong enough, you can do this!
fight it, hisako!
it's no use!
believe, hisako!
just believe in yourself .
emma...
we're all here to help you.
we all believe in you but we can't do it for you.
this is your very first lesson.
my first lesson?
that's right.
you can do it.
i'm right beside you.
you passed.
emma...
you're an excellent student.
i'm proud of you.
emma!
this is just a gut feeling but l don't think emma was responsible for jean's death.
it's not that l doubt what you say but she is not our enemy, at least.
she's an excellent teacher.
you have to admit, cyclops.
fine, but let 's not forget...
she's a telepath...
and for all we know she could have been controlling
hisako's mind and our minds this whole damn time.
todd:
so much for our headquarters.
but on the bright side, we collected plenty of data.
x-men bastards!
let them have their fun for now.
they were just put into a deep sleep.
l see.
beast:
charles , hisako is fine.
we've freed all the young mutants.
organs!
emma:
hisako!
narrator:
emma protected hisako from the laser that todd, the surviving u-man, fired.
an unusual transformation occurs in emma's body.
the x-men take emma and hisako to the xavier institute in new york and are attacked by a mysterious monster on the way.
what is the true form of the monster and the surprising truth behind emma's unusual transformation?
next x
men.:
transformation.
__file_terminal__
beast:
charles , hisako is safe now.
we have rescued all the other mutant children, as well.
organs.
organs!
hisako!
what's going on?
what's happening to me?
give me back my organs!
cyclops:
emma, you're transforming!
i'm transforming?
is this your first time?
what the hell is he?
storm:
we'll take care of him.
todd:
organs.
where the hell did he go?
organs.
my organs.
nobody takes those organs from...
what just happened to me?
are you okay, emma?
numbers definitely confirm the transformation.
luckily , it doesn't look that serious.
emma:
l..
emotions can sometimes trigger what causes some people to transform.
that would explain why it happened when emma was fighting to protect hisako.
however, once you've transformed, there is a greater chance that, someday, you will lose control and become a monster.
it's a disease for mutants called the damon-hall syndrome.
the damon-hall syndrome...
the transformation doesn't always cause the symptoms to appear, but you need a vaccine to treat them.
emma.
hisako!
mom!
mom.
thank you so much.
we thought that we'd lost her forever.
thank you.
mr. and mrs. lchiki, forgive me for not getting in touch with you the minute l got to japan, but...
we were delighted when mr. beast told us that you'd come.
we're just happy to know that you're safe.
we were relieved to hear that you were with hisako.
hisako!
ouch.
l was so worried about you.
i'm so happy to see you.
her best friend.
cyclops:
she's a mutant, too?
no, she just has a big heart.
she doesn't care if you're a mutant.
even here.
l thought everyone here hated mutants.
there won't be any more children disappearing.
words can't express our gratitude.
we're preparing a meal for you.
it shouldn't be much longer.
would you lend me a hand?
sure.
in my opinion, it's essential that we take you to new york as soon as possible.
to new york?
yes, i'd like to run full tests on you at the xavier institute.
no way.
l can't let you bring her to the institute.
there was nothing in the u-men hideout that could jam our mutant detection system.
what does that have to do with me?
it means that someone else was blocking cerebro from detecting mutant activity.
you're saying that l was responsible for that?
enough!
i've already told you.
i'm not involved with the inner circle anymore.
besides, i'm not a strong enough telepath to jam a system like that.
but your...
excuse me, lunch is ready.
cyclops, l believe emma.
look, she transformed because she was trying to protect hisako.
they say that every mutant transforms differently depending on its abilities.
all mutants are concerned about this transformation.
okay, l guess beast is right.
l will take the tests.
honestly , l still can't believe it happened to me.
but those tests can only be done in new york?
beast:
yes, and the xavier institute is the only place where we can get the vaccine that l developed for the damon-hall syndrome.
if that's the case, then i'm coming with you.
hisako!
l just began to learn how to use my powers.
i'd be completely lost if emma left now.
mr. and mrs. lchiki, would you allow hisako to accompany me to new york?
well , we...
i'd like to be with her so that l can teach her more about her powers.
moreover, there is always a possibility that she could transform, too.
l suppose it's not a bad idea to get the vaccine now.
right.
all right, then.
as long as you're with emma, okay?
i'm glad, hisako.
thank you.
me, too.
emma:
is that a problem , cyclops?
no.
do you think l can see a broadway musical while we're in new york?
well , it is a short drive to manhattan from the xavier institute.
we can certainly try to do that once we've completed emma's tests.
can we?
an unidentified object is approaching us from behind.
beast:
it passed us!
wolverine:
l didn't see anything.
beast:
l got this!
cyclops:
it 's all yours!
are we going to die?
we'll be fine.
beast:
l can't hold it any longer.
hurry!
gotcha!
he is a mutant.
judging from how out of control he was, he may have transformed and developed the damon-hall syndrome.
that would be my guess.
wait, he was one of the kids from the inner circle' s mutant training academy.
what?
hey, remember me?
his body is back to normal, but he's still not fully conscious.
these are all typical symptoms of the damon-hall syndrome.
poor thing.
he was such a sweet boy when l first met him.
if l remember correctly , he said he was from northern japan.
do all mutants turn into monsters like him?
is that going to happen to me, too?
the x-men will find a way to help us.
i'm sure of it.
we'll do our best to find out why this is happening at the xavier institute.
emma frost.
hisako ichiki.
welcome to the xavier institute.
i'm professor x.
pleased to meet you, sir.
l hope you'll come to think of this as a second home.
you're both part of the family now.
thanks.
thank you, professor.
it'll take me about four or five hours to examine the boy.
i'm sure you're all tired from the trip.
why don't you get some rest?
cyclops:
sounds good to me.
wolverine:
thanks, beast.
hang in there!
oh, god.
l can't.
calm down, hisako.
what did the inner circle do to him, emma?
nothing, really.
except reinforcing his mutant powers and mind control abilities.
are you sure about that?
we didn't conduct the same type of experiments that the u-men conducted.
although, i'm not sure what happened to the mutant training academy after that battle in which jean died.
l heard that the inner circle disbanded after the battle.
he may have gone back to his hometown in northern japan.
if so, there is a good chance that he was in a u-men facility.
but when we examined his body, there was no evidence of experiments on his body.
beast:
you're right.
no experiments were conducted on him.
i've got the results from the tests on his cellular tissues.
l couldn't tell if he was at a u-men facility or not, but his transformation wasn't caused by an experiment.
it had been suddenly triggered by an unknown cause.
suddenly triggered by an unknown cause?
man, whatever it is, l have a bad feeling about this.
beast:
okay, emma.
we'll begin when you're ready.
emma:
all right.
no, no, no.
don't go in there!
hey, no cheating!
yeah!
three wins in a row, scott.
thanks!
l get free meals for the next three days now.
damn it!
one more time.
i'll bet my motorcycle.
if you wish, we can bet the blackbird.
l tried using the cerebro to detect mutant activity in northern japan, but it is still blocked out.
cyclops:
damn it!
okay, let 's run an mri next.
charles:
l suppose you're anxious to hear about emma, aren't you?
yes.
by the way, there is something l wanted to ask you.
sure, anything.
have you ever heard of the sasaki academy?
well , it sounds like something l might have heard, but l don't really remember anything about it.
l was little.
that's okay.
thanks anyway.
is she okay?
emma has the same x-antibody that poor boy had.
what?
then, are you saying that the same thing's gonna happen to her?
you don't have to worry about that.
he said mine is benign.
thank goodness.
emma:
you must be hungry.
we haven't eaten anything.
why don't we all go grab a bite?
yay!
just as l suspected.
both emma and the boy transformed in northern japan.
and cerebro still can't detect mutant activity.
there is still something going on in northern japan.
things aren't over for us just yet, are they?
narrator:
emma and hisako became the x-men's newest members.
as the training begins,
hisako sees that she still has a lot to learn about her powers.
meanwhile in order to resolve the misunderstanding between her and cyclops,
emma agrees to undergo a telepathic examination with professor x.
the x-men witness the truth that lies in emma's heart
next time on x-men.:
power.
__file_terminal__
okay, really high, really high!
that's it!
l didn't sign up for this!
let me go, you bucket of bolts!
l just started, l can't die yet!
oh, come on!
you don't really wanna do this, it's fake anyway.
it's just like my dream.
up and at 'em, kiddo.
if that had been the real thing, you'd be just a skid mark.
sorry, emma.
l really blew it.
you're still learning to use your powers, don't be so hard on yourself.
just curious, what exactly have you been teaching her?
every one of us has to come to grips with who we are, frost.
and learning the extent of her mutant powers should have been first on the list.
yeah, not to mention working on her guns.
if you misperceive that, you'll fall prey to the temptations of an evil organization.
hold on a minute!
do you mean emma?
l don't know what you think, but emma frost saved my life!
and she risked her own to do it!
you hear me?
you owe her an apology!
that's enough, hisako...
why are you always so hard on her?
ls that the type of teamwork l can expect from the x-men?
she isn't a member of the x-men, and l don't owe her a damn thing.
before you criticize others, you'd better quickly prepare yourself to be a full-fledged mutant.
a full-fledged mutant?
what exactly are you?
he told you.
don't get so worked up.
beast:
the later risk of outbreak of damon-hall syndrome due to secondary mutation is quite high.
it's just like we saw in that boy.
speed up the vaccine production.
the secondary mutation is already developing in emma.
we must vaccinate her immediately.
l understand.
l'll need the team to pay another visit to northern japan to get to the bottom of this, once preparations have been made.
hlsako:
is that the type of teamwork i can expect from the x-men?
l've brought you all here for hisako, nothing else.
we shall welcome her as a junior member of the x-men.
no objections, l assume?
l think she'd fit in well with the x-men.
and we shall welcome emma as a member of the x-men.
she will be hisako's instructor.
what's there to argue about?
she did a hell of a job protecting hisako in japan.
how about it, emma?
cyclops:
l'm against it.
emma:
you still have doubts about me?
l didn't have anything to do with jean's death.
if that's so, let the professor perform a telepathic probe.
let's prove you're not lying.
l refuse.
if that's what it takes for you to believe me, l don't need to be a member.
what?
l'm not sharing my private thoughts with anybody, is that clear?
hlsako:
hey, has cyclops always been so nasty?
beast:
who?
scott?
he always has such a stern look on his face!
he said, "before you criticize others,
you'd better quickly prepare yourself to be a full-fledged mutant.
he's the one who goes around judging everybody!
l know emma feels bad about being part of the inner circle.
yet, isn't it just like a man to throw salt into an open wound?
scott harbors deep wounds in his heart.
he won't be rid of them easily.
even now, he's struggling to find an answer.
just like you, hisako.
l'm struggling?
if emma refuses, l don't intend to perform a telepathic probe against her will.
thank you, charles.
scott, emma's joining us has been decided.
l will abide by your decision, but...
but?
should emma double-cross us, l will not be responsible.
l don't think emma is tangled up in jean's death.
but, for a guy like scott, he's sure persistent in keeping an eye on emma.
if it wasn't emma, who was the woman he saw a year ago?
emma:
for a leader in the inner circle, projecting my likeness would be a fairly simple matter.
do you mean mastermind?
yes.
l heard that even a year later, there's no trace of him to be found.
the lnner circle have, in fact, suspended their activities.
if mastermind does live, those activities will no doubt resume.
what's wrong, scott?
hisako has been made a junior member of the x-men.
we'll begin intensive training immediately.
l'm in the x-men?
ls emma joining us as hisako's trainer?
yes.
emma, too?
hisako, let's get going!
l don't want to be taught by you.
emma's my instructor.
that doesn't cut it.
l lead the x-men.
you follow my orders.
who's my training opponent?
a giant robot again?
a combat machine?
bring it on.
even frankenstein's fine.
you'll be fighting me.
what?
when you're fighting imaginary enemies, there's no real risk.
if you know in the back of your mind that there's no danger, you'll hesitate.
but...
take me as your enemy.
do not hold back, because l won't.
that kind of...
we begin.
hlsako:
hold on!
l can't think of you as my enemy!
what are you doing?
this is dangerous!
this isn't a joke!
sorry.
l'm not the joking type.
l think he really means it.
you!
are you really trying to kill me?
l thought l told you.
l'm not going to hold back.
stop it!
help me!
emma!
hey, hey!
l don't mind tough training, but she's still just a child!
this is overkill!
l'm stopping this.
emma:
wait.
just a little longer.
we'll be too late by then!
l know.
but...
the child hasn't yet released her true power.
help me!
please!
stop already!
cyclops!
your enemy isn't going to let up because you ask him to.
if you fall into the enemy's hands, you'll suffer the same fate as the mutants who died.
don't...
l don't want to...
you better try to overcome this situation with your own power.
no!
what the hell is he thinking?
he's trying to provoke hisako into unleashing her power.
stop it!
don't hold back your power!
hold back my power?
let go completely!
try to focus.
control your power, don't let it control you!
that son of a...
he's talking about jean.
don't come near me!
don't give in to it!
don't lose sight of yourself!
it's no good.
get back.
clear your mind!
focus your power!
hisako.
she stopped it.
nicely done.
there was nothing nice about it!
this power is turning me into a monster!
wolverlne:
it's no use.
we've already seen what happens when symptoms of damon-hall arise.
it's only natural that she considers herself to be a ticking time bomb, a potential monster.
then, if her heart breaks, she'll be of no use to the x-men.
ororo.
hey there.
got a minute?
these powers...
like you, l didn't understand how to use them at first.
everything around me was eerie.
l was worried, very worried.
if l hadn't met charles, l don't know what would have happened.
he protected you, didn't he?
he didn't just protect me.
he showed me the way, and guided me on how to be true to myself, how to use my powers.
humans and mutants are different.
but they have one thing in common, a heart.
a heart.
the x-men are a bridge between the hearts of mutants and of men.
now, take pride in your powers and in your role as an x-man.
l want to lead a normal life.
l want to forget about my powers.
you're only running away from your future and your fate.
emma:
that's right, hisako.
that's your weakness.
if you don't learn to master it, you'll succumb to it, just as cyclops fears.
whether you want it or not, you were born a mutant.
you can't run away from your destiny.
destiny?
if you accept everything, you have to have a strong heart and toughen up.
l don't have confidence.
l'm not a confident person like emma.
l'm a weak-hearted person.
it's no use.
come with me, hisako.
are you sure, emma?
yes, but l have one condition.
condition?
yes.
l want you to project everything you see inside my mind to the entire team.
everyone?
yes.
hisako, as well, of course.
emma.
understood.
let's begin.
charles:
this is emma as a young child.
woman 1 :
that girl gives me the creeps.
it's like she can read your mind.
woman 2:
what's worse is her icy stare.
they say she's a mutant.
mutant?
that's creepyi
charles:
this is around high school.
girl:
why did your boyfriend suddenly change his mind?
girl 2:
it's her fauiti
boy:
you're a great girl, but i can't forgive you for deceiving me with telepathy.
charles:
and emma on her 20th birthday.
man 1 :
miss frost is wonderful.
man 2:
yes.
she's the perfect woman.
charles:
then that man appeared.
mastermind.
mastermlnd:
you're bored with human society, aren't you?
i want to provide you with the perfect place.
welcome to our inner circle.
but, miss frost, i think i'd iike to proceed cautiously with this investment.
actually, it's a brilliant proposal.
let's draw up the contract just like you said.
well done.
his fortune now belongs to us.
we'ii ask for your help again.
charles:
not understanding the significance of her power, she made mistake after mistake, until finally, she drove a man to his death.
mastermlnd:
do you feel guilty?
the man lost all hope, and threw his own life away.
emma:
i am the one who has lost all hope.
enough of this, already.
wait.
are you trying to act seif-righteous?
you fooii
charles:
and a year ago, on this same day,
emma was with a boy who had a wounded heart.
a mutant boy.
emma:
go ahead and cry.
let it all out.
but someday, you'ii understand the true significance of that power.
charles:
this is what happened on the day of the battle.
when jean died, emma was not there.
emma.
you innocence has been proven.
emma!
you understand now, don't you, hisako?
l may be a strong person, but l'm not a pure one.
l now see that l made mistakes and l regret them.
if l can change, so can you.
l'll be your strength.
l believe you, emma.
l'll do my best as an x-man.
l'm sorry for everything.
from now on, we're allies, aren't we, cyclops?
or should l call you scott, perhaps?
it's cyclops.
well, nice to meet you again.
charles:
this vaccine is for all of you, of course.
distribute it to hisako's parents and to the mutants in the tohoku area.
make sure to have them all vaccinated.
we understand.
nice duds, ladies.
storm:
you both look marvelous.
l think so, too.
now that we're all here, take a look at this.
so far, here is where mysterious events thought to be mutant phenomena have occurred.
here is the center point, a remote mountain region.
most likely the causes of the mutant detection interference and the secondary mutations are to be found there.
that's correct.
lnvestigate it thoroughly.
okay.
departure time.
here we go, hisako.
charles, is that all we should investigate?
what do you mean?
the woman, sasaki yui.
you read my thoughts.
when you performed the probe, our minds were linked.
even if you try not to see something, sometimes you do.
that's okay.
if you want to hide it, l won't pursue it any further.
charles:
yes, i was anxious about what i was hiding.
what we are attempting to go up against may be an existence beyond our imagination.
emma:
at the behest of professor x the x-men fly to northern japan once again.
with their two new members, the x-men soon find themselves facing the remnants of the u-men, hungry for revenge.
with the u-men's high-tech capabilities giving them the upper hand, the x-men find themselves fighting an uphill battle.
backed into a corner, their chances of survival appear grim.
next time on x-men.:
conflict.
__file_terminal__
look at this.
this is the area where unexplained happenings, thought to be mutant phenomenon, have occurred.
l circled the area.
at the center is a remote mountainous region.
most likely the causes of the mutant detection interference and the secondary mutations are to be found there.
yes, please check thoroughly .
man:
yes, they are coming toward us again.
but not to worry.
we can handle them this time.
l also asked my guys to come, just in case.
but l hope you guys can handle the x-men.
you bet we will.
the real part of the fight is from here, professor x.
i can imagine the look of surprise on your face.
we've been expecting you.
hisako!
what are you wearing?
cool, isn't it?
welcome home, hisako, it's so good to see you.
thanks, daddy.
well , just look at you.
l almost didn't recognize you.
you look all grown up.
you look like another person.
emma, thanks so much for looking after her.
for selecting her as a member of the x-men, even though she's a trainee.
oh, don't thank me, she did it all on her own.
she's the one who managed to survive the insane training that cyclops and wolverine put her through.
we threw everything at her but the kitchen sink.
and believe me, we've only scratched the surface of your daughter's potential
she has grown up emotionally and developed consciousness as an x-man.
she has a very bright future.
how can we ever thank you?
good for you, hisako.
l get that l still have a lot to learn, but i'm determined to give it all i've got as a member of the x-men.
to build bridges between humans and mutants.
l know you all must be tired after the long journey, but people who want the vaccine have assembled here.
by all means, let's get started.
thank you.
oh, by the way...
what is it?
actually...
while you were in new york, the fish in the river started dying and so did many of the trees.
we've had a number of strange occurrences in the area.
and there's a bridge in the mountains that's twisted like a pretzel
hisako's father:
people here are getting scared and think that mutants did these things.
cyclops:
l see.
we'll look into it right away.
beast, go ahead and get started without us.
no problem .
storm and wolverine, check out the river...
the three of us will take a look at that bridge.
it should mitigate the symptoms you've been having.
thank you, doctor.
wow,
although there are so many mutants in this one small area, it's peculiar that cerebro didn't detect them.
hisako:
here's the next one, dr. mccoy.
excuse me.
this is what happened to my hand.
the second mutation...
doctor, is the vaccine effective even for this?
at the very least, it won't get any worse.
since when have you had this?
l see.
this suddenly appeared about three months ago.
yes.
well , so far, this river looks fine to me.
l smell something rotten upstream... ...but there is something more...
this smell is...
storm:
why is the river this color ?
l don't know.
but something's definitely not right.
yuck!
really makes me wish l didn't have these heightened senses!
storm:
what is happening?
what on earth is all this gas?
hisako:
do you think people are right in assuming that mutants did this?
emma:
you cannot blame peopl for thinking that way.
only magneto is capabl of something like this.
but it cannot be him, he is locked up.
anyway, it's much worse than we heard.
hey, cyclops, beast told me that you have a big wound in your heart.
a wound you might never totally heal from?
how did it happen?
hisako...
sometimes things happen that people would rather not talk about.
wolverine:
depending on their ability, some mutants may be capabl of doing that to the bridge...
storm:
but we cannot conclude that a mutant is responsible.
emma:
the same thing goes for the gas fields.
in any case, there's something happening and we don't exactly know what it is.
what's more, people think mutants have done this.
beast:
well , that's it for today.
you two ladies were an enormous help .
thank you both.
any time!
totally.
l couldn't ask for a more charming pair of assistants.
we are charming, aren't we?
we better go help with dinner now.
come on, kyoko!
don't push me!
i've finished administering the anti-viral l vaccinated the mutants with signs of secondary mutations first.
but l didn't expect there to be so many...
some of them were on the verge of complete genetic degradation.
surprisingly , all of them live here, in this circl where the mutant phenomena took place.
also, they experienced secondary mutations these last several years.
it means that there is something triggering the mutations at the center of this area.
l suppose so.
cyclops:
all right, then.
we'll check tomorrow morning.
storm:
we're coming up on the target zone.
emma, what is it?
that noise!
my head!
how can you stand it?
what noise?
we don't hear anything, darling.
what the hell , cyclops!
what's going on?
l don't know.
i've lost control!
can't you do something?
we've got an incoming missil l can't avoid it!
hang on, everyone!
we're gonna take a hit!
how's she doing?
whatever it is, it seems to be getting worse.
it seems to have started when we entered the center of the circle.
then, it has something to do with...
darn it!
what's going on?
those weird noises?
is that what you heard earlier, emma?
those weird noises?
emma?
what on earth was that what happened to the x-men?
really?
come on, storm.
can't you do something about that freaky snow?
l could if it was the weather!
that's not snow i've ever seen...
are you feeling any better, emma?
a little.
the noise has stopped.
there is something terribl happening in this area.
and it might be what's triggering the mutations.
anyway, it's not safe to return to the blackbird.
it might explode.
for now, we should leave.
wolverine:
the u-men.
again.
that's just great!
are you ready for round two?
stay back!
i've got him!
right back at you, you one-eyed freak.
catch!
cyclops.
next up, the freak with adamantium for bones...
what the...
there'll be nothing left but a puddl of molten metal!
wolverine!
oh, go fly a kite, weather witch!
wolverine!
i'm comin' now.
damn it.
but he must have a weak spot somewhere.
hisako!
l wasn't able to get much data on you two.
but l don't think i'll need much.
my telepathy isn't working!
you little. ..
hisako!
ouch!
beast:
the shield generator is in the top of the spinal column.
that's my target!
l have only one, but it's all yours.
get back!
i'll finish him off!
damn you all .
is everyone okay?
sure.
never better.
my shoulders are sore and stiff.
beast:
what have we here?
some sort of mutant detector...
cyclops:
a what?
looks like cerebro.
l thought these devices could only be found among us.
what do you mean?
we couldn't detect a mutant in this region.
there is a monster here, more dangerous than any other mutant.
gosh, we should get out of here!
even with all your powers, you cannot handle that monster.
it's surprising the u-men were developing the detection system by themselves and that they were searching for mutants.
then it wasn't the u-men, who interrupted the mutant detection.
wolverine:
then who is responsibl
hisako?
is she all right?
why don't you let beast carry you?
but don't fall asleep.
otherwise, you will never get to see the broadway musical
yeah, last time we didn't make it.
smells like humans.
over there.
we're lost.
and we hoped you might let us come in and warm up?
of course.
here you go.
a cup of tea ought to help warm you up.
thank you.
excuse me.
you're dr. sasaki.
yes?
yui sasaki?
that's right, the sasaki academy.
professor x was just asking me about you.
l couldn't remember very well , but you are dr. sasaki, aren't you?
i'm hisako ichiki, remember me?
little hisako?
it's incredibl finding you way out here in the middle of nowhere!
when l was littl l attended the sasaki academy.
the sasaki academy is a school for mutants.
dr. sasaki was headmistress there.
l don't know why l couldn't remember.
that's strange.
hisako:
in a building located deep in mountains, the x-men encounter a woman, yui sasaki.
emma senses that yui is hiding something in the way she acts and speaks.
meanwhil dr. sasaki contacts professor x and gives him startling news.
next time on x-men.:
betrayal.
__file_terminal__
yui:
there has been abnormal mutant activity in the tohoku area.
did you find something out?
nothing in particular.
it's jumping to conclusions to blame the twisted bridge and the strange occurrence in the river on mutants.
beast:
however, the u-men's mutant detection device found a strong signal.
yui:
l can't understand that.
but l'm surprised.
little hisako becoming a member of the x-men!
when l remembered the sasaki institute, professor x was happy, too.
charles was...
will professor x be joining you here as well?
cyclops:
no.
he left the investigation to us.
l see.
emma:
what exactly is this sasaki academy?
we were never as big as the xavier institute, but we took in the mutant children from the area temporarily.
so, are you also a mutant?
no.
storm:
ln that case, why?
l wanted to do something for the children who were snubbed and couldn't go to school, just because they were mutants.
but... l suppose there were limits to what l could do alone.
cyclops:
so you shut it down?
yes.
now l use the facility for medical and mutant research.
you know, dr. sasaki, l... l was really good friends with a kid in school.
good friends?
yeah.
l think that kid was a little younger than me.
it was a boy, but... l can't remember him no matter how hard l try.
dr. sasaki, do you remember him?
back then l had so many children here.
l really don't remember.
kolchl:
doctor!
it's almost time for the meeting.
these are the members of my research team.
from the left, this is koichi kaga,
jun sanada, and riko nirasaki.
and these are the x-men.
l've heard about what you've done.
it's an honor to meet you.
that's everyone?
yui:
yes.
go ahead.
kolchl:
excuse me.
the weather appears to be clearing.
it might be a good time to go check on the blackbird.
l'm sorry to trouble you, but could l borrow some tools?
yui:
yes.
l'll go, too.
storm:
l'm coming, too.
beast:
scott.
you talk to hisako and emma.
cyclops:
however...
understood.
the research facility is in the back of this house.
yui:
the main equipment is underground.
a boy...
younger than me...
yui:
hisako.
you used to go to an ordinary school, right?
yeah.
l used to come to the academy after my regular school let out.
maybe that boy was a friend of yours at school?
maybe...
by the way, yui.
aren't you an acquaintance of professor x?
yes.
it was more than 15 years ago, but l did meet him once.
emma:
more than 15 years ago?
but we were never close.
it was such a long time ago, l don't really remember.
l have to go to a meeting, so please make yourselves at home.
if you need anything, you can reach me on this intercom.
l feel like dr. sasaki's changed.
cyclops:
changed?
yeah.
she used to be kinder and warmer, l think.
she still seems kind, at least to me.
that's true, but...
yui sasaki is lying.
she said she hasn't seen professor x in 15 years.
but she has seen him since then.
did you read her mind?
it's because of things like that that people hate mutants.
no.
l didn't use telepathy.
this is a woman's intuition, right?
cyclops:
a woman's intuition?
when we mentioned the professor, she called him "charles.
even though they weren't that close.
some people use first names even with people they're not friendly with.
but she had asked you if professor x was planning on coming.
yui sasaki is involved with professor x on a much deeper level.
a deeper level...
wolverlne:
all right, let's pull it out!
beast:
that's impossible.
l'm joking.
storm!
could you melt all this ice?
that's also impossible.
look at this snow.
l wonder if you could even call it snow.
beast:
hmm...
at first glance, it seems like snow, but...
storm:
it doesn't melt.
it's not even cold.
beast:
it seems more like a mineral.
so in japan they have diamond or ruby snow?
of course not.
it's as ifjust this place was suddenly changed.
beast:
at any rate, there's nothing we can do like this.
l'll contact charles and have him send a spare blackbird.
charles:
yui sasaki?
beast:
yes, i thought i'd let you know, just in case.
understood.
ln any event, l'll send you the backup jet at once.
thank you.
it's been a while.
yui.
l wasn't expecting you to contact me.
from the sound of it, you've already heard a report about me.
charles:
i hear you've shut down the academy.
yui:
let me just state my business.
l want to continue my research here in peace.
are you saying the x-men are in the way?
l'll help if needed.
but l want them out of here as soon as the investigation is over.
would something be disturbed if they stay too long?
it may be the key to solving the string of mutant occurrences around your lab.
l have nothing to do with it.
l'm not so sure about that.
when l sent my mind to tohoku,
i saw you and a boy.
i couldn't see his face, but you overiapped with him.
does that boy have anything to do with you?
why did he enter my mind?
answer me, yui.
that boy is probably takeo.
takeo?
he's my son.
mine...
and yours.
our son?
you're telling me l have a son?
so then that was...
my son entered my consciousness.
that is incorrect.
if you say you saw him, then you just happened to look in my mind.
but i'm certain i met that boy.
you said you couldn't see his face.
that's natural.
because takeo is already gone.
what does that mean?
do you mean our son is dead?
someday l'll tell you everything.
but for now, please stop meddling in my affairs.
beast:
staying here is pointless.
huh?
ln the meantime, let's go back to the sasaki house.
an avalanche?
wolverlne:
doesn't seem like it.
ls a mountain monster making snowmen or...
what on earth is that?
it seems that snowman has business with us.
so let's go say hello!
wait!
what's that?
storm.
there's one here, too.
greetings, ladies and gentlemen of the x-men.
how do you like japan?
it's not bad.
the food is good and the scenery's nice.
then you'll have no regrets when l kill you here!
sorry, but l haven't seen any kabuki yet.
wolverlne:
what are you?
some kind of hedgehog monster?
beast!
did you pulverize him?
there was no resistance.
you are pretty tough.
it's about time.
what?
beast:
so that was the aim of the attack just now.
the greetings are finished.
let's meet again.
l see.
he can liquefy his body.
that's why he offered no resistance.
this is no time for analysis!
let's get out of here!
jun?
l'm going to take my shot in my room.
make sure the x-men don't see you.
be careful.
l understand.
emma:
hisako?
ls something wrong with your right hand?
the bruise on my hand is hurting.
cyclops:
bruise?
it used to be bigger.
emma:
do you remember an injury or a burn?
no.
mom and dad also say they don't remember it, so l thought it was just a birthmark.
it suddenly started hurting when l got here.
has it ever hurt you like this before?
l don't think so.
that's strange, l wonder if something irritated it.
l... l'm going to ask dr. sasaki for an ointment.
hey!
she told us to use the intercom, remember?
emma:
it's all right.
it's not as if she's going outside.
but...
this is a good opportunity.
l need to talk to you.
talk?
automated voice:
biackbird auto-piiot engaged.
launch preparations complete.
you want me to let you read my mind?
yes.
what for?
to remove your hesitation.
my hesitation?
l heard you couldn't fight the berserk mutant at the u-men base and almost lost your life.
ls it because of jean?
the professor proved l had nothing to do with jean's death.
so what is making you suffer?
hisako also asked me.
help him," she said.
it's none of her business.
she's worried about you in her own way.
and l also don't want a leader who's so hesitant.
at this rate, it may impede our work as x-men.
face your heart.
l'm sure jean would wish for that, too.
wolverlne:
l don't like this.
storm:
what's wrong?
yui sasaki said she introduced us to everyone in the mansion.
but l can still smell someone else in there.
indeed.
she doesn't seem to want us there.
yui sasaki's presence at the center of the mutant phenomena and the appearance of the u-men seems a bit too much for coincidence.
storm:
seems we'd better keep an eye on yui sasaki.
beast:
that's why l asked scott and emma to stay.
jean:
scott.
the x-men are a light for mutants.
i want to become that light.
and i want to continue shining a light on the future for human and mutant children.
i'm begging you, scott.
kill me.
cyclops:
you know i couid never do thati
you...
what did you do to jean's heart?
l love you, scott...
jean!
you are?
now you die, too.
scott.
dr. sasaki?
emma:
feeling better?
cyclops:
yeah.
the shadow you saw behind jean, it's natural that you'd think it was me.
l was attacked by myself.
what on earth was that?
that must have been your subconscious, the part of your mind where you can't forgive yourself for not saving jean.
l... tried to escape my inability to save jean by blaming you for her death.
you're right, the one person l can't forgive is myself.
now that l know you had nothing to do with jean's death, what should l do?
one year ago, if l'd been there when jean went berserk, l might have been able to save her.
and you, as well.
listen to me, scott.
aren't you the one who taught hisako that an x-man's most important quality is his heart?
you need a stronger heart than anyone else.
don't let jean's will go to waste.
jean:
i want to become that light.
and i...
i want to continue shining a light on the future for human and mutant children.
cyclops:
so now you want to coach me, just like hisako?
narrator:
the beast that suddenly appeared in the lab turns out to have an unexpected identity.
amid the confusion, emma becomes suspicious of yui sasaki's assistant jun.
meanwhile, danger approaches professor x as he fiies to tohoku from new york on the blackbird.
a new facet of the case is revealed.
next time on x-men.:
lost
__file_terminal__
dr. sasaki!
it's below us.
dr. sasaki!
hlsako:
dr. sasaki!
what is it?
what's the matter?
come on!
let's get out of here!
jun:
get behind me!
emma!
take care of those two!
not a problem!
great, so now it can fly.
cyclops, we're back.
the blackbird's not going anywhere so it looks like we're stuck.
hisako!
what is that monster?
it appears to be focusing on dr. sasaki.
as l suspected.
its genetic compounds are breaking down, just like the others.
breaking down?
okay, but how do we stop this thing?
beast:
they've been infected with a virus that attacks the mutant genome.
l've synthesized a counter agent for it, but l doubt administering it will be easy.
we need to take it alive!
but...
we have to save this one!
hisako!
come on, hisako, get it together.
be careful!
l'll try.
now would be good!
okay!
armor to the rescue!
l guess l don't know my own strength.
l only knocked it out, right?
it's riko.
it can't be.
riko.
not a fan of bugs, huh?
wasn't he supposed to be the girl's friend?
why the hell did he run off like that?
something doesn't smell right here.
automated voice:
fifteen minutes until destination.
charles:
it's been a iong time since i first met yui.
there was a mutant incident in japan.
on my investigative trip to tohoku,
i met yui.
she was an amazing teacher.
it didn't matter to her if a child was a mutant or not.
to her, they were all just people.
and then,
somewhere along the line, we fell in love.
and when it was time for me to go,
i asked yui to come to new york with me.
but yui said,
yui: "in the same way that you have children in new york,
i have children here
who depend on me.
you of all people should understand that, charles.
charles:
when my iife had finally calmed down enough and i couid go back and see her, she refused to see me.
yui:
this boy you are seeing is probably takeo.
takeo?
yes, my son.
our son.
charles:
looking back, it all makes sense.
she was trying to hide our son from me.
and the boy, my boy, may very well have possessed mutant powers.
but yui said that he was gone.
someday, i will tell you.
i promise.
about my son...
and how these visions subconsciousiy appeared...
these things must have something to do with the incidents.
i need to see yui in person and get answers.
yui:
it seems to be working.
she won't wake up for a while.
beast:
l'd like to examine her further back in my lab at the institute.
although it's evident that her genetic compounds are breaking down, l still hope we're not too late.
with any luck...
doctor, if this is the first time, her syndrome might be controlled by the vaccine l developed.
yui, l'm going to administer it now.
yui:
she's in your hands.
hmm.
she's no stranger to injections, apparently.
does she have a medical condition?
uh... l'm not really sure.
she used to inject herself when she was tired.
shouldn't you be aware if one of your staff has a condition?
l try not to get involved in people's private affairs.
l'm afraid that's all l can tell you.
l was surprised to find out that it was riko.
now that we're giving her this medication, you won't have to worry anymore.
let's hope she doesn't lose control again.
right, emma?
yeah.
wolverlne:
where the hell is kaga?
huh?
ln there!
this is riko's room.
whatever happened to that kid must have started in here.
aha.
you promised it would cure us.
how could this have happened?
found him!
hey!
open up!
if you don't open the door, l'm just gonna invite myself in.
you're a mutant, too, aren't you, kid?
l can smell it on you.
not that l'd need to.
wasn't too hard to do the math.
yes, it's true.
back when our powers were first discovered, l entered sasaki academy.
then when the academy closed,
dr. sasaki asked me to assist her in mutant research.
and since then, l've been working with riko.
and to have something like that happen to her...
cyclops:
what were you just injecting?
kolchl:
nothing.
wolverlne:
your friend was taking the same stuff.
ls it so bad that you can't tell me?
kolchl:
l can't say.
not without dr. sasaki's permission.
wolverlne:
doc's orders, huh?
yui sasaki must have told him not to say anything about it.
how about sanada?
what's his deal?
kolchl:
what do you mean?
ls he from the academy, too?
no, he's only been here for about nine months.
dr. sasaki hired him on because of his talent as a researcher.
wolverlne:
and there's nobody else in the lab, right?
it's just the four of you?
kolchl:
correct.
cyclops:
well look, whatever the facts are, you should ask beast to give you the vaccine he developed at the institute.
but what about dr. sasaki?
wolverlne:
you need a permission slip or something?
l have great faith in her.
wolverlne: suit yourself.
beast:
l still don't understand.
there is an unusual amount of mutants in this area.
and yet cerebro is unable to detect them.
and then there's the virus targeting the mutant genome.
as far as l can tell, this seems to be ground zero.
but why would that be?
l don't know.
l wish l had the answer, but l have no idea.
that's true.
whatever this virus is, it's beyond anything l've...
forgive me, doctor, but l find it hard to believe that someone with a background in mutant research can claim ignorance in this matter.
look at this girl!
had you told us from the beginning, we could have maybe avoided such a thing.
you have to believe me, l never dreamed that anything like this would happen to riko.
forgive me.
l'm not feeling very well at the moment.
please, excuse me.
dr. sasaki.
damn.
secondary mutation.
son of a...
we have to catch him!
with pleasure!
how could this happen?
it's koichi!
l think we found him!
hlsako:
dr. sasaki!
beast:
everyone, exercise extreme caution.
it's koichi kaga.
he's lost control like all the others!
l don't get it.
why isn't he ripping her to pieces already?
what's he doing with her?
look at him.
if l had to guess, l'd say he's got a thing for her.
what?
man, this is wrong.
the kid was falling all over himself around the good doctor.
l mean, he's known her since he was little.
it's not hard to understand that he admired her.
yeah, and now that he's more monster than man, he's acting on raw emotion.
okay, that's it.
l'm going in!
hisako!
that's enough.
stop this.
please, koichi.
no more!
please.
wolverlne:
did he come to his senses?
cyclops:
it's too early to tell.
hlsako:
wolverine!
are you all right?
yeah.
so many...
he's like a brick wall!
he won't budge!
give it another go, kid!
okay!
storm:
we did it.
wolverlne:
probably needs a nap after that.
jun sanada?
wolverlne:
ls cyclops all right?
not really your day today, is it, bub?
cyclops:
it seems he's returned to normal.
storm:
we need to get him back to the medical center to be sure.
poor bastard.
the guy has every right to be crying.
dr. sasaki.
yui:
why did it happen to koichi?
beast:
l've given him the anti-viral.
just like riko, he had needle marks on his upper left arm.
are you going to tell me those are from insulin, as well?
we need to vaccinate your other assistant.
yui:
jun?
we can do that later.
l found something interesting.
some sort of liquid concentrate.
someone was stockpiling it.
there was a mini fridge full of the stuff.
dr. sasaki, are you okay?
lnteresting.
l'd say you owe us an explanation.
automated voice:
we are now entering japanese territory.
please enter landing coordinates.
what could that have been?
some kind of entity reached into my thoughts.
it managed to sever my psychic link with the x-men.
narrator:
the anomalies in the mutant population of northern japan have all been traced back to dr. sasaki's research facility.
unfortunately, the good doctor isn't all that forthcoming.
emma has discovered the terrible truth behind yui's assistant,
jun sanada.
next time on x-men.:
reveiations.
__file_terminal__
cyclops:
this serum has to have something to do with riko and kaga's mutation.
the needle marks on their arms were not from ivs.
they were from injecting the serum.
what could that be?
could it be this substance that's causing the mutations?
yui:
no, in fact, it's quite the opposite.
it's formulated to inhibit dna and suppress mutant powers in order to keep mutants from getting out of control.
storm:
suppress mutant powers?
so you're saying that you knew what was happening to mutants in northern japan all along?
yes.
you lied to us?
l'm sorry.
as the results from your investigation showed, there have been many mutations here over recent years.
l have been giving this suppressant to riko and the others so that their mutant genes wouldn't be affected.
then l'm afraid the suppressant is not very effective.
l guess.
it has been less effective on riko in the last several weeks.
she's come very close to mutation a few times.
that's why l was trying to generate an even stronger suppressant.
they should get my vaccine as soon as possible.
l agree.
my question is, what were you doing here when you knew about all of this?
does your research have anything to do with the fact that this place is at the center of the mutant activity?
l can only say that my research is important for the future of humans and mutants.
hlsako:
dr. sasaki!
l've seen what happens to mutants who lose their minds because of the syndrome.
and it should never happen again!
beast:
the mutation phenomena are spreading quickly to a much larger area.
a secondary mutation.
and some of them have already developed the damon-haii syndrome.
even emma has...
where is emma?
l could have sworn she was here a minute ago.
that assistant of yours is gone, too.
yes.
let's find him.
he needs to be vaccinated right away!
hold on!
l can't just let you run around the facility!
beast:
we haven't finished with you yet!
you stay here.
the professor needs to know what's been going on here.
no!
please, just give me a little more time!
you've already had far too much time, if you ask me!
charles!
it's henry.
are you there?
charles:
scott.
logan.
ororo.
emma.
it's no usei something is preventing me from using my telepathic powers.
that's...
i can't stay herei if i do, i couid go insane.
i have to find a way out.
thinki
that sound.
it sounds like living creatures.
it's coming from the other side.
could it be some type of illusion that's all in my head?
only teiepaths can create such an illusion.
very powerful telepaths.
if my opponent is indeed teiepathic,
i should be able to break through this.
it's my mind against yours.
let's see who blinks firsti
there's nothing wrong with the signal.
l fear something's happened to charles.
what do you mean?
if emma were here, she could try contacting him telepathically.
emma:
there must be something very important behind those doors.
miss frost, what on earth are you doing here?
following you.
l had no idea.
a hidden elevator followed by three sets of doors requiring passwords.
that's some serious stuff.
it's a restricted area.
you're not allowed to be here.
and you are?
of course l am.
l'm part of the research team.
are you really?
you look like a young japanese man.
when my body transforms into diamond, l lose my telepathic powers.
but there's also another side effect that occurs during the transformation.
l become insusceptible to telepathic powers.
how have you been, jason?
or should l say,
mastermind?
very impressive.
but of course, fooling everyone by creating the illusion that you are sanada is an easy task when you are the leader of the inner circle.
l thought the inner circle had decided to disappear for a while.
l never imagined it would be operating deep in the mountains of japan.
l knew l should have killed you when you left the inner circle.
you walked out on us because you thought our noble cause was inconceivable and immoral.
well, l kind of knew you would someday.
emma frost.
l don't see them anywhere.
hlsako:
where could they be?
storm:
could they be outside?
no, l don't think so.
l can smell something over here.
you mean...
it's hollow inside.
storm:
hey, this isn't your house.
don't make a mess.
be a gentleman.
hlsako:
don't worry, l like the wild type.
emma:
why don't you just tell me what you are trying to do?
all right.
how can l say no to a dear old friend?
last year, l discovered the presence of mutant activity in this area, shortly after the battle with the x-men.
professor x couldn't even detect the activity.
how did you find it?
the lnner circle has many connections with this country's underground society.
one can use means other than telepathy to obtain needed information.
people talk, you know.
l see.
l suspected that there was a stronger power working behind the activity.
so you wanted to use the power for your own ambitions.
since this research lab is located at the center of the mutant activity, you used your powers to fool everyone into thinking that you are jun sanada, a member of the research team.
bingo.
as always, you catch on quickly, emma.
they trust me enough to give me access to this facility.
and now, l have discovered where the power is coming from.
so what do you think?
shall we join hands once again?
your power and beauty is more than one can ask for in a partner.
tell me one thing.
with pleasure.
ln the battle against the x-men, you created that illusion of me for cyclops to see, didn't you?
it was a shame that you had walked out on us just before the battle.
l was a little concerned that you might join the x-men after leaving us.
l thought it would be a great idea if the x-men were to kill you for me.
rumor has it that cyclops was useless for a whole year after jean grey's death.
crying over a girl's death seems pretty pathetic for a mutant, don't you think?
l hate you.
guess we're not getting back together then, huh?
what a pity.
well, well.
l love your shiny new look.
l guess your beautiful body will protect you from my psionic powers, since you can't use your telepathic powers when you're in that form.
how will you ever defeat me?
oh, that's right.
you did take some martial art lessons.
emma!
what was that?
go, don't let him get away!
storm:
sanada?
hlsako:
why?
emma:
that's just a disguise.
that's not sanada.
it's an illusion.
cyclops:
an illusion?
she's insane!
she attacked me for no reason!
she tried to kill me!
it must be the transformation!
she just went crazy!
wait a minute.
something isn't right.
my nose is picking up the scent of someone who has not yet been introduced.
l hate this smell.
actually, there is more than one smell.
there's something else behind those doors, something fishy.
do you want to tell us what's really going on?
wolverine!
logan.
jean.
protect me.
logan.
wolverine!
what the...
stop it!
what's happening to him?
it's an illusion.
he's seeing us as his enemies.
there's the man behind it.
but how...
storm:
wolverine!
stop!
now you die!
hisako!
stay back!
hlsako:
stop it, wolverine!
it's me!
no, hisako!
stay back!
hlsako:
snap out of it!
please!
hisako, stay back!
emma, you too!
beast!
we need you, fast!
beast:
what is it?
cyciops and wolverine are about to kill each otheri
what's going on?
i'm not sure, but woiverine is trying to kill us.
trying to kill you?
we have to stop him, nowi
where are you?
in the basement.
not there!
once again, he gets someone else to fight for him.
what are they doing?
l don't understand.
cyclops is trying to save his friend.
hisako, l need you to stay put, okay?
l'm going to...
mastermlnd:
little girl, you stay put, okay?
you were always stubborn, emma.
let's see if you can hold up against marsh.
have at it, marsh.
make the lady squirm.
pardon me for interrupting.
hisako!
l'm an x-men, too!
calm down, or l'm gonna have to put you down.
now, cyclops!
he gave me no choice.
damn!
yui:
no, sanada!
don't go there!
stop!
what happened?
was it a miss?
it's now or never!
jason!
l think it's about time you showed your true colors.
emma:
l've deactivated his psionic field.
you can finally see him for what he really is.
cyclops:
you...
from the inner circle.
mastermind.
storm:
that explains why marsh is here.
greetings, x-men.
always a pleasure.
he used his psionic powers to make you believe that you saw me a year ago.
mastermlnd:
yes, the death of jean grey.
such a terrible tragedy.
my deepest sympathies.
bastard!
cyclops:
stay back.
he is mine!
wait, cyclops!
that system is... l'll kill him!
no, wait!
cyclops!
wolverlne:
ls the party over?
wolverine!
don't say anything!
good, the party's still happening.
storm:
the deadly battle continues between the x-men and the inner circle, whose members want to take control of all evil powers.
the x-men finally discover what dr. sasaki has been hiding from the world.
the wheel of fate has begun to spin, revealing its cruel yet sad truth.
next time on x-men.:
countdown
__file_terminal__
my dream will soon become a reality.
so l need my loyal men by my side.
my trusted right-hand man left me, though.
right, emma?
beast, emma, stay with dr. sasaki!
curse you!
who is he?
don't let him go in there!
that's mastermind, a member of the inner circle.
what's the inner circle?
a mutant organization whose main goal is to create a new world order, with mutants ruling over humanity.
they're evil and mastermind's their leader.
he deceived you.
made you think he was your assistant, jun.
but the whole thing was an illusion.
an illusion?
he's not jun sanada?
that's right, you better run!
wolverine!
how did l...
kaga.
hey, kaga, wake up!
what happened?
riko, how in the world did l get here?
l don't know.
l've been asking myself the same question.
l don't remember anything at all.
what happened?
kolchl:
it can't be.
what happened to riko, happened to me, too.
what was that?
it's my mind against yours.
we'll see who's stronger.
l'm not strong enough!
it's no use.
jean:
chariesi chariesi
charles, you can't let them down.
you have to keep fighting.
that voice!
jean?
hey, you.
you were looking a little pale.
l thought you could use a tan.
whatever.
well, you can scratch rat off our to-do list.
damn it.
l thought l had him.
yeah, well, he's out of range now, anyway.
but l still smell something rotten behind those doors.
there are three people.
no, more than that!
kolchl:
dr. sasaki!
rlko:
doctor, what happened here?
first, kaga and l wake up in the infirmary.
and then we find out that the laboratory's been destroyed!
yui:
it's hard to explain...
not really.
try telling them the truth.
it's her custom-made virus.
it accelerates the very mutations it's designed to prevent.
it does what?
what are you saying?
then, we...
beast:
yes.
first, riko's mutant powers went out of control, and then yours, kaga.
don't worry, you're all right now.
it's over.
l've treated you with a vaccine that l developed back at the xavier institute.
your dna is now stable.
rlko:
but...
kolchl:
doctor, how could this happen?
l wish l knew.
we failed.
all l can do is apologize.
rlko:
it can't be!
l'm so sorry.
that enormous device...
there's a similar mutant detection device at the xavier institute, but it's probably not the same thing.
lsn't this the device that's blocking cerebro and mutant detection through telepathy?
perhaps a demonstration is in order.
just as l thought.
the device detects any attempt to scan for the x-gene.
then it somehow blocks or scrambles our detection capabilities in this facility.
even for the x-men and these two,
mastermind and his mutant.
ls that just about right?
feel free to jump in at any time.
so this is what was blocking professor x and cerebro.
this thing was jamming their scanning devices.
the worst part is that you clearly knew you had something to hide.
why else would you want to black out this entire area?
you could've done something to prevent or even stop the increase in mutations and the incidents caused by the damon-hall syndrome.
l can't believe it.
why are you blocking the detection of mutants, if you're the one doing research on them?
dr. sasaki?
did you two know what was going on?
you're mutants, for god's sake!
you just stood by and let her...
later.
we need to focus on mastermind.
now what's behind that door, doctor?
it has something to do with what mastermind told me when he stopped pretending to be jun sanada and l discovered his true identity.
wait, what are you saying about jun?
l'm confused, what do you mean?
that wasn't really jun?
you two will just have to try to catch up.
mastermind found out about the strange mutant activity occurring here last year.
after the battle with the x-men, he discovered that something very powerful is responsible for the series of mutations.
naturally, jason wasn't going to leave something like that alone.
so he came here and wormed his way into gaining dr. sasaki's confidence, hoping to find the source of this power.
and from what he told me, he did.
and now, l have discovered where the power is coming from.
what did he discover?
what is the source of this power?
listen, doctor, if you know anything about this, you better tell us.
your inhibitor no longer works because you are hiding what is responsible for the series of mutations at the back of the dome, right?
dr. sasaki...
forget it, this is a waste of time.
l say we go in.
mastermind is in there.
l will handle it!
yui:
wait!
you're right, it's in there.
the source of power.
but you don't understand...
the power itself is terrible, but what's behind it is the sweetest...
he's the reason why l began developing the inhibitor.
the one kaga and riko were taking.
so you're saying that the source of this remarkable power is a mutant?
one of the u-men told me something odd and it's all starting to make sense now.
there is a monster here, more dangerous than any other mutant.
what can be more dangerous?
he had a cerebro-like scanner that wasn't affected by the device.
l think l know why.
the u-men were working for you, weren't they?
what?
my work required mutant tissue.
l couldn't develop the viral serum without it.
the u-men got the tissue that l needed.
from a fresh organ.
and you two knew about this and did nothing?
ln return, we made the mutant detection interference device and we gave them a device to help them avoid the interference.
you knew that they were killing mutants with that device and you did nothing?
you were helping to kill mutants!
no, l can't believe it.
dr. sasaki was...
that does it, l've heard enough!
time to gather some tissue of my own!
no, wait!
please, look at it from her point of view!
yeah?
what point of view justifies working with those mutant-hating scum bags?
she wanted to keep her hands clean.
what could you do?
it was the only choice you had.
to obtain organs.
but recently, the inhibitor has not been working well and the power source hidden behind the door started to leak.
this is why you promoted the awakening of mutants in this region.
right?
instead of hiding, why didn't you contact professor x?
you two were close once, weren't you?
cut the crap.
when are you gonna tell us who you've got hidden back there?
if we have a chance at stopping him, you've got to stop wasting our time and start talking.
what could this mean?
the closer l get to those doors, the more this thing hurts.
finally, l was starting to get impatient.
we were about to begin without you.
takeo.
who's that?
he's my son.
and charles is his father.
he's charles' kid?
that's his son?
really, your own child...
we didn't know!
we thought he was just a patient!
not dr. sasaki's son!
l bet the professor doesn't even know about him.
he didn't.
not until l told him shortly after you arrived.
there was a mutant incident in this area once and professor x came.
love was in the air.
cue the violins.
l checked everything.
that man...
the person you thought to be jun sanada was, in fact, mastermind.
kolchl:
he was jun?
that time, she built a school for young mutants and dreamed of giving them a good education.
but then her own son started showing that he didn't fall too far from the x-tree.
she began seeking a cure for what she called the, "mutant condition.
luckily, she had two mutants with her.
her dutiful lab assistants.
she came upon the idea of a custom virus that would eradicate the mutant part of our dna.
right, kaga and riko?
but our research didn't progress as well as we expected.
the doctor discovered that fresh mutant organs were the key to saving her dear son.
knowing that the u-men hate mutants just as much as they enjoy murder, she hired them to do her dirty work.
you know, you make me sick.
what she didn't know was that the u-men are cooperating with the inner circle.
since when did the u-men decide to start cooperating with mutants?
maybe because she knew that she could kill more mutants by collaborating with us.
that's why she accepted to work with the inner circle.
but little takeo here, is what's important.
the first omega-level mutant since the late jean grey.
all we needed was someone like takeo to change this world as it should be.
a world ruled by mutants.
so we haven't given takeo any inhibitors over the last months.
what have you done to him?
thanks to you, l've had months to work on his mind, breaking it down little by little.
all this time, behind our backs...
you monster!
now, here's a real monster.
neuron.
he's the white bishop of the inner circle.
emma:
watch out!
no!
beast:
what the hell?
they're both dead.
yui:
what?
no!
kaga!
riko!
what have you done?
they're dead because l shocked them.
they were gonna die, anyway.
l have this wonderful way of showing people what pain feels like.
what did you just say?
he can override a person's neural pathways using his powers, don't forget.
l can crank up all your senses to levels you've never dreamed of.
l'll make the sound of a pin dropping a mile away so loud, it'll burst your eardrums.
or even better, give you a teeny little pinch so painful that you die from electric shock.
yeah?
pinch this, jackass.
automated voice:
warning.
unstable descent trajectory.
danger of impact.
now, enough moping around, takeo, let's get this party started.
come on!
no, don't!
go on.
bring an end to all your misery and release the power raging within you.
takeo!
my hand!
why is it...
man 1 :
what's going on?
man 2:
good lord!
what is that?
man 3:
it's gotta be those damn mutants again!
can you feel it?
it barely started and the earth is already trembling.
if you value your friends' lives, you won't interrupt.
besides, where are your manners?
the boy is just getting started.
narrator:
as mastermind gets closer to dominating the world, he holds the x-men captive, while unleashing takeo's power.
when professor x and yui sasaki's child, takeo, destroys the facility and escapes, the countdown to world destruction begins.
but can takeo's mother and father, dr. sasaki and professor x, even control this power?
next time on x-men.:
revenge.
__file_terminal__
if you value your friends' lives, don't move.
you just sit back and watch.
l need to give undivided attention to what l'm doing.
don't try to resist.
can't you tell there's nothing you can do?
l've already felt this heat and pain before.
takeo!
takeo?
l remember you now!
emma:
hisako, do you know him?
he was at the sasaki institute!
we used to play together.
he was my friend.
yui:
takeo, don't!
if you release your powers, the world will be destroyed!
the world will be destroyed?
what are you talking about?
takeo's power can twist and distort everything around him.
cyclops:
distort everything?
correct.
he doesn't just twist solids or liquids.
he alters dimensions, as well.
even dimensions?
all laws governing matter and energy on earth will cease to function.
what are you doing?
can't you see you are hurting takeo?
l'm causing him pain through my illusion.
what are you saying?
if you no longer want to feel pain, takeo, destroy everything around you!
yui:
don't, takeo!
dr. sasaki was also crying that day.
boy:
the only enemies left are hisako and takeo!
mom, l...
l...
takeo.
it hurt so much.
everyone was in pain and crying.
how could l forget?
omega-level telepaths can erase their existence from other people's memories.
particularly, if he's inherited charles' blood.
so takeo...
yui:
takeo thought that he had become a monster because he hurt his friends.
he wanted to forget his own existence.
so he subconsciously erased himself from the hearts of others.
hlsako:
takeo must have been so hurt.
his power hurt his friends.
so he went so far as to make us forget about him.
yui:
l decided to close the institute after that.
l hid takeo from the eyes of the world and desperately researched his abilities.
l only wanted to protect him.
why didn't you ask us or professor x for help?
takeo...
he...
his father, charles, who had brought him into this world...
and his mother...
me...
mastermlnd:
have you finished confessing?
automated voice:
altitude.:
2,000 meters and faiiing.
jean:
charles.
charles:
jean, is that you?
your children are in danger.
protect the future of mutants.
charles.
automated voice:
altitude.: 1, 800 meters.
was that an illusion?
or perhaps...
real or not, l can't afford to sleep.
lsn't that right, jean?
no, takeo!
you mustn't release your power!
what a waste that would be!
how can you lock away such magnificent power?
bravo, takeo!
this is an omega-level power!
with you, taking over the world will be easy!
hlsako:
i won't forgive himi
takeo hurt the people around him, but it was nothing compared to the pain he had to sufferi
he's been compieteiy alone.
aii because of his poweri
if you're going to abuse that power... l won't forgive you!
damn you!
useless.
new kid's doing all the work.
us veterans can't put up such a pathetic show!
beast:
yes, l concur.
we'll need to do something about his sensory amplification power.
our nervous systems can't take much more of this.
takeo!
hisako, l'm going to take care of this man!
cyclops!
can you really do it?
hisako!
get down!
cyclops:
jean.
jean, what's going on?
why is everyone like this?
it's your fault.
my fault?
because you didn't shoot me a year ago.
because l didn't shoot...
this is the future that you created for mutants.
that's...
it's all your fault.
hlsako:
cyclops!
this is bad!
he's being sucked into the illusion!
storm:
emma!
break the illusion!
l can't!
not in diamond form.
my telepathic powers won't work!
and if l revert back to normal, he could harness my power to create an even more powerful illusion!
very astute of you, emma.
then we'll have to take him out first!
what is this?
takeo.
emma!
hisako!
cyclops:
this is the future l created for mutants?
jean:
yes, it's your fault.
it's your fault.
all your fault.
stop!
this is bad, beast.
as soon as he makes a move, hit me!
hit me!
as hard as you can!
what do you mean?
that's the only way we can break this sadist's power!
l'll break my limits!
but, logan, if you do that, then...
just do as l say!
come and get me!
l don't know what's on your mind, but l'll do as you wish!
now!
wolverine!
keep hitting me!
so foolish.
what!
has this guy lost all sensation of pain?
you monster!
you bastard!
he did it!
stop it!
wolverine!
that's enough, wolverine!
wolverine!
get a hold of yourself, wolverine!
logan!
hey, there.
was that a secondary mutation?
the damon-hall syndrome is something else.
should l vaccinate you again?
even a hundred shots wouldn't do it.
that took a lot out of me.
x-men, l'll have you all die here.
starting with your leader.
storm:
cyclops!
open your eyes!
hlsako:
cyclops!
emma:
cyclops!
jean:
the future you wanted was filled with despair!
now, you too shall sleep in despair.
jean!
who are you?
jean?
shoot!
that's...
this is just like the last time!
shoot.
stop, cyclops!
l can't shoot!
shoot.
no!
don't shoot, cyclops!
cyclops!
please, shoot.
don't, cyclops!
stop!
shoot.
cyclops!
l...
don't shoot!
cyclops!
fire!
scott!
jean.
cyclops!
yeah!
that's impossible!
why did my illusion break?
jean, l think l always felt guilty for not shooting when you were in pain.
even though you begged me to shoot you that day.
you showed me the way, even in an illusion.
l'll never be as good as you.
but l'm ready.
l can finally say goodbye to you.
don't celebrate just yet.
all you did was break my illusion.
l still have takeo!
what's this?
nonsense!
this power is for me to...
l'm going to...
stop!
stop it!
takeo!
don't go too close!
cyclops:
it's falling apart!
everyone get outside!
what's that?
automated voice:
unusual turbulence detected ahead.
danger.
l'm breaking through.
cyclops:
if that immense power spreads throughout the world...
emma:
it will cause mass destruction.
wolverlne:
we gotta stop him here.
are you going to attack takeo?
stop!
don't hurt takeo!
at this rate, more and more people will suffer.
takeo will be hurt in the end.
l know you understand.
now, l understand.
hlsako:
what was that?
it's takeo's power.
it's destroying the world.
cyclops:
l'm attacking!
disperse!
l can't do it!
go with yui!
my head...
charles.
professor x:
the world is hurtling towards its demise.
and the x-men cannot stop it.
they are defeated, one by one.
in a cruel twist of fate, a father is pitted against his son.
how will it end?
and what will become of the future?
next time on x-men.:
destiny
__file_terminal__
charles:
so he is the cause of this calamity?
cyclops:
professor x.
charles:
the world is facing destruction.
fellow mutants...
i am professor x of the x-men.
the abnormal phenomena you face now are occurring all over the world.
your power is needed now.
both those with power and those without must band tightly together.
no differences or discrimination exists between the inhabitants of this earth.
aii are one.
yui:
charles!
that child...
takeo...
he's your child!
l thought my son was no longer in this world.
a father cannot fight his own son!
that's absolutely wrong!
dr. sasaki!
takeo!
stop this now!
no one is trying to hurt you anymore!
hlsako:
doctor!
you idiot!
wolverine!
my lightning...
it should be impossible to freeze electricity!
don't do it, emma!
your mind will be destroyed!
lmpossible!
l should be immune to my own blasts!
so that is takeo's ability...
the power to bend and twist everything.
yui:
takeo!
stop!
please, stop!
takeo!
stop!
takeo.
takeo, you're a kind person.
hisako...
stop it!
hlsako:
wait!
charles!
charles:
l have to kill him.
the professor's attempted probe was deflected!
normal rules don't apply to the composition of takeo's mind.
it has incredible power.
he made it in.
takeo.
now!
while professor x is in his mind, we'll destroy takeo's body!
cyclops, stop!
hisako!
takeo can't move right now!
you can't attack him like that!
and if takeo dies...
charles dies, too.
if takeo's power goes wild, the world will be completely destroyed!
but...
hisako!
l want to empathize with your feelings for your friend.
but l have to agree with cyclops this time!
we have to do it to protect the world.
hlsako:
ls that really true?
ls that really the only way to save the world?
if takeo dies, will that really solve everything?
emma:
hisako.
this is a painful decision for cyclops as well.
takeo.
control your power.
your incredible power will cause sorrow to the world, and most importantly, to you.
l will give you all the guidance l can.
now come.
do you hate me that much?
do you reject me, your father?
wolverlne:
this is bad!
charles:
are you telling me to give up?
if l lose here, the world will end.
l cannot allow my only son to be the destroyer of this world.
jean:
stand, x-men.
jean...
wolverlne:
so even i eventually die and get a tearful reunion with jean?
jean:
you must not give up.
for the sake of mutants and humans of this world, you must not give up.
that's right.
right now, mutants and humans are rising up against this threat together.
was that an illusion?
no, it was jean.
that's right.
we cannot allow ourselves to be defeated here.
cyclops:
we cannot allow takeo to use his power any more.
jean, i now understand why you...
sacrificed yourself back then.
it was to protect your friends and the world.
emma?
you're planning on diving into takeo's body and blasting him, aren't you?
if you do that, even you won't escape unscathed.
emma.
let me go.
l don't want to.
what did you say?
didn't jean leave the future of humanity and mutants in your hands?
even if it's painful, you need to grit your teeth, stay alive and fulfill her wish.
wasn't that jean's wish?
takeo, will you not let me accept your...
hatred and pain?
ls it impossible for me, takeo?
l have no choice but to shut down takeo's mind.
emma:
charles is trying to end it all by shutting down takeo's mind!
that's horrible!
emma:
charles intends to disappear along with takeo's mind.
cyclops:
what did you say?
yui:
charles!
what foolish thing is he doing?
dr. sasaki!
takeo, if you want to take someone with you, take me!
take mommy with you!
charles:
l won't let you go alone.
l'll share your pain.
hlsako:
you can't!
this is definitely wrong!
hisako.
l won't let it end this way!
takeo, it's me, hisako.
you remember this burn, don't you?
yeah, it's a painful memory, isn't it?
but we had wonderful memories too, didn't we?
so, so many... so many!
wolverlne:
emma!
takeo, you can stop now.
you don't have to suffer.
please, don't suffer anymore!
charles:
takeo.
her form changed?
what a beautiful light...
charles:
you came to meet me?
you wanted me to save you?
and l didn't realize that or understand you at all...
dad.
takeo.
forgive me.
takeo.
mom.
yui:
l thought l would have to do this someday.
even though it was for takeo, l worked with the u-men and collaborated in the mutant hunting.
l've hurt many people.
it's not something l can atone with death.
nevertheless... l'm sorry, charles.
you can't!
yui:
takeo.
takeo:
thank you.
charles:
yui, this is what takeo wants from us.
even if it hurts we must live, and hold on to each other.
that is takeo's wish.
goodbye, takeo.
yui:
he had no symptoms of mutation at birth.
the first manifestation of his power was when hisako and the other children saw it.
when you came to tohoku eight years ago, takeo's power was awakened.
just being born my son gave him great power.
and moreover, for myself to awaken it...
even though l have raised so many mutant children as my own, l killed my own son with my own hands.
yet he was smiling at the end.
we should be grateful to hisako.
l...
even though the world is harsh, we must stand and face it head on in order to bridge the gap between humans and mutants.
even though there are people like mastermind and the now imprisoned magneto... all magneto can do now is stare at the chessboard in his cell.
love and friendship can defeat the powers of evil.
you have taught me this.
cyclops...
this is for you.
hlsako:
this is...
we are friends who trust each other.
that is your proof.
thank you, scott!
hey!
but you know, l learned a lot from emma.
maybe you should take lessons from emma, too?
sounds like you have a lot to learn, scott.
by the way, our ride home is burnt to a crisp...
now what do we do?
oh, dear...
__file_terminal__
on an overcast evening at this aircraft factory in north wales, a few survivors of world war ii will gather to reflect on their contribution to that war.
early in the 1940s, a group of workers here set out to break a world record.
they would try to build a bomber as fast as they could.
faster than the americans who, in their factory in california, had taken 48 hours from start to finish.
we started on the saturday morning.
we just got cracking.
we were all like busy bees, all busy...
hoping to do the best.
did you think you could do it right from the very start?
it seemed impossible.
i remember all the bustle.
oh, gosh, it was like a beehive!
did you know that the americans had set a world record for building a bomber?
it was fine, we always want to beat the americans, don't we?
the plane they chose to build was a wellington bomber.
the wellington was, for many years, the raf's main strike bomber.
apart from the spitfire and the hurricane, more wellingtons were built during world war ii than any other british aircraft.
aircrew love a plane that they feel that if they do their bit, the plane will do its bit.
and with the wellington - fantastically strong, very robust, totally reliable - crews always knew that even if you've been shot up on a mission, if you lost one engine, all sorts of disasters of one kind or another, you had a very good chance that the plane would get you home.
it was a lovely aeroplane to fly.
it was just built so you could shoot hunks of it out if you had the misfortune to be hit and it more or less shrugged its shoulders and pressed on regardless.
the designer of the wellington was dr barnes wallis, who would also design the bouncing bomb that would breach the mohne dam and make legends of the dambusters, the air crews who delivered them.
max hastings has written a definitive work on bomber command.
barnes wallis said he was almost prouder of having created the wellington than he was of having created the bouncing bomb.
it was a brilliantly inspired piece of construction.
you can't design and build an aircraft in five minutes, it takes years to do.
but in the mid-1930s, barnes wallis produced this inspired design.
this extraordinary geodetic construction gave it this strength that enabled it to withstand a terrific amount of punishment.
and of course the hydraulic turrets.
the raf was enormously proud of those - these were revolutionary technology in 1939.
better than anything the germans or the americans had.
by the time that war came up, the wellington was in full production.
this sophisticated aircraft was designed less than 30 years after the wright brothers had made the world's first powered flight.
britain got an enormous amount wrong in the 1930s about its own defences.
when the war came, it didn't have anything like enough of anything - fighters, bombers, soldiers, rifles, machine guns - anything.
but some terrific design decisions and production decisions were made.
it was undoubtedly one of the great aeroplanes of the war.
but britain had also taken a number of acute political decisions in the 1930s.
the chamberlain government, while negotiating to avoid a war with hitler's germany, had also drawn up plans to put britain's industry on a war footing.
manufacturing skills were pooled and the potential to build weapons of war were assessed.
shadow factories were built where tanks, guns, planes could be assembled.
broughton was one of them.
hilda dodd was one of the first women to work at the broughton factory.
i went for an interview and they asked me what i could do.
i said i could use a machine.
they said, "what sort?
i said, "a sewing machine, my mother had a treadle." "oh.
so they put me down for machine work.
can you remember your first sight of the factory?
oh, it was a mess.
muddy, wasn't much there.
there was like a hangar and that's where i went to, into this hangar.
there were men working on parts of it, putting it together like a meccano.
at its peak during world war ii, the broughton production line was turning out 28 wellington bombers a week.
these workers were in the front line as much as the men who would fly the aircraft they would build.
easy aircraft to build.
they had good, long range and they were very economical.
but they were produced quickly, that was the main thing.
instead of 1, you'd get 100.
the target these workers set themselves that weekend so many years ago was to build a wellington bomber in 30 hours.
did you think you could beat that record?
we had an idea we could.
and so this evening, bob wilson joins old friends in the audience for a unique film show.
newsreel:
'this is a bomber factory in britain...'
they started to build wellington ln514 early one saturday morning, all those years ago.
and because they wanted to tell the world how efficient were the british production lines, the british made a propaganda film about the record-breaking attempt.
'we had our cameras in position when the workers arrived at the factory.'
they put a north american voice on the soundtrack to show america not only that britons could take it, as they had during the long years of the blitz, but that they could dish it out as well.
many of the men and women who built this wellington are seeing this film for the first time.
'the clock strikes nine and the record-breaking attempt begins.
'two sections of the fuselage are carried in.
'the dark girl with the riveter is eileen daphne who used to work in a rayon factory.
'one of her brothers was killed in a naval action...'
women filled the places on the production lines left vacant by the men who had gone to war.
betty weaver was working on the counter in the local co-operative store when she was conscripted go to broughton.
living in a mining area, the men were either in the army or working down the pit.
is that why they needed women to do the job?
yes.
what did you feel about that - did you mind?
not at all, it was something completely different.
i felt as if i was doing something useful for a change.
my father was in the army, my husband was in the army.
i felt as if i was supporting them.
can you remember your first impressions of the factory
when you saw it?
i was horrified!
i was issued with a big, white boiler suit that fit where it touched.
'the fuselage parts are assembled in big frames they call jigs.
'you can get some idea now of the size of the bomber.
'it's almost 65ft long.'
women were of course absolutely vital.
first to the war effort as a whole, and secondly in aircraft production.
a lot of them proved very good at what they did.
britain mobilised women arguably more effectively than any other wartime nation except possibly the russians.
the main assembly at broughton aircraft, it was a huge space without any columns.
were you good at electrics?
i didn't know one end of a screwdriver from the other when i got there!
no.
i am now.
what was the training like?
for the first three weeks, i never slept.
then all of a sudden, it all slotted into place.
did you have to pass a test at the end of it?
oh, yes.
everything was inspected and, if it wasn't right, you had to go back and do it again.
'here is evelyn coates, an inspectress who used to work in a draper's shop.
'she told me at this point that she had found no faults at all.'
boys as young as 14 worked on the production line.
bill anderson, who worked at broughton until he was 64, first came here when he was 14.
war seemed nothing to fear, simply a new experience.
my father was an arp warden.
when they started dropping incendiaries, we used to go for a bucket of sand to extinguish the incendiaries.
i think we were charging 6p for buckets of sand and they were quite grateful for it, really.
we used to go potato picking, you'd get let off from school.
then of a weekend, you'd go collecting rosehips.
they were used for rosehip syrups, that was for babies.
all helping the war effort?
it was all helping the war, but it was a game to us.
'these volunteer workers are giving the bonus they are earning today to the red cross aid to russia fund.
'they're out to break that 30-hour record they've set themselves.'
i started here straight from school.
there were a lot of women here.
they mothered you, if you like.
what was the job that you were first shown how to do?
the main wing spar was in two pieces.
we had to join them together - they didn't use bolts, they had a type of long pins.
the basic tool in those days was a copper hammer with a hide end that we used to knock these pins in.
then they were inspected.
'in the wing assembly, there is more activity under the eagle eyes of the inspectors.
'though you may not think they're working fast, the progress they are making speaks for itself.
'it's only 10 o'clock - one hour from the starting time.
'grace whalley and hilda dodd are doing a man's job of work, 'assembling the bomber's cabin heater.'
hilda dodd's peacetime job was in the local photographic shop.
i was taught how to make the fuselage and bomb floors.
was the factory ever bombed?
we had two lights up in the ceiling.
one was amber and one red.
then one night, the red light came up.
everything went dark.
we were told to all link hands and go outside, and there were some air raid shelters.
and as we were going down, i happened to look to the left and i could see some planes on fire.
they'd dropped some incendiaries.
well, i was frightened.
well, i think the majority of us were scared.
but we were all right down in the shelters.
there was just, like, wooden seats and you could all sit around and talk and sing.
what sort of stuff did you sing?
oh, the old stuff, gracie fields.
# sing as we go and let the world go by
# singing a song we march along the highway... #
'back in the main assembly, the wooden floor is fitted to the fuselage.
'notice how everything fits with precision.
'there's no bullying the parts together
one fits willingly with the other.
'the forward bulkhead frame goes in, and then the pilot's seat, 'control column and the cockpit floor, all in one unit.
'and how's the time going?
'well, they've been working 1 hour and 17 minutes.'
you were working long hours?
oh, yes, 12 hours.
8 till 8.
it was dark when we went out of a morning and dark when you got home at night.
when i didn't go on the work's bus, sometimes i used to have a lift with a chappie from greasby, and we used to call at a farm on the way back, and he used to get a few dozen eggs, because we only had one a week then.
and he used to break three and swallow them whole.
but they must've been black-market eggs, mustn't they?
there was rationing at that time, of course.
did you...?
rationing...
all i can remember of the canteen were the chips and the rice pudding.
it was all right until we went in the canteen early one night and all the chips were all ready to be finished, you know?
and there was a cat sleeping on the top of them, so we took a dislike to the chips after that.
'testing the flaps on the wings is eva williams, a nurse by profession, 'testing fractures in tubes instead of in bones.
'the short dark girl assembling the ailerons 'is 23-year-old evelyn homewood, whose husband is in the royal air force.'
in a way, it was a job, but we were working for the boys.
you were patriotic.
well, i was, for one, anyway.
well, they were fighting for a cause.
and that makes a difference.
everybody had somebody in the war.
they had somebody in the forces, so it was worth fighting for, to see them home again.
unfortunately, a lot didn't come home.
hilda dodd's husband percy was in the royal navy on minesweepers.
tell me about how you met him.
through a friend that worked in the factory.
we went to a dance and she introduced us and she said, "he can't dance.
i said, "i'll ignore him." so i ignored him all night.
but we made up after.
did you dance with him eventually?
well...
well, you couldn't call it dancing.
it was like taking a wheelbarrow round a room.
and then i found out after he was going for dancing lessons.
he got called up to go in the navy.
it was all done in a rush and he said, "i haven't time to go and buy the ring with you.
so i went and picked the ring myself.
and then i never saw him again for three-and a-half years.
my dad was in the 4th battalion royal welsh fusiliers, and harry was called up to the 6th battalion royal welsh fusiliers.
tell me about the wedding and your honeymoon, then?
he came home on the saturday, we went to see the vicar on the sunday, we were married on the wednesday and he went back on the sunday and i didn't see him again for two years.
percy dodd blew up the mines that threatened the convoys he was protecting.
he was up and down the mediterranean to malta.
i used to say my prayers every night and very often during the day when i was working, hoping he was all right.
i was very lucky he came back.
i mean, a lot didn't.
'there's our chief cameraman...'
it is 80 minutes since the attempt began.
the airborne division went out to north africa, the glider pilot regiment landed on sicily and they came back to this country with some of the parachute regiment.
but the part my husband was in, they went into italy and then they liberated greece, so that's why i didn't see harry for two years.
you wore a badge?
oh, my little naval badge.
he bought me that before he went.
no matter where i went, i pinned it on.
that was part of him.
he gave me that, so i always had that with me.
even at work?
oh, yes, i never went without that.
'at 10.27, the foreman gives the word and into the framework of the aircraft 'pile the electrical workers armed with the tricks and the tools of their intricate trade.'
it wasn't hard work, it was fiddling, connecting wires and things up.
you had to be very careful.
'construction went on and the inspectors beamed with satisfaction.'
bob wilson was superintendent of the production line that weekend.
he recalled elaborate preparations for the record-breaking attempt, a certain amount of pre-assembly.
the electric wiring and all that was done along the panel before the fuselage was built.
you just had to drop it in?
right.
sharp practice was that?
exactly.
sounds good, that, doesn't it?
how did you organise the production line?
you didn't have to, the people knew what to do.
'at 1.45 in the afternoon, the main fuselage is ready to come out of the jig.
'in the stitching and doping section, 'the four great sections which give the bomber its 80ft wingspan are now being covered with fabric.
'flashing fingers and winking needles.
'one wrong move, the needle would hit metal and the point would break.'
constance and ben mottram were courting during the war and married in 1947.
constance sewed linen for the rudders of wellingtons in what had been a small car factory nearby.
she worked the night shift.
my auntie always had breakfast ready when i got in from work the next morning, and then afterwards, after i'd had breakfast, i'd brush my teeth, wash, freshen, and then i'd spend the rest of the day in bed
until it was time to go to work.
it must've been a very long night for them, all the girls, mustn't it?
12-hour nights, sewing all night long.
there were a number of mines around the broughton factory, producing coal to fuel the british war effort.
coal miners were exempt from military service, and ben mottram worked at the llay main colliery.
it started mining coal in 1921.
my father worked there.
and he was there at the sinking of the pit itself.
it was the deepest in europe.
in europe.
that's deep.
it was as deep as snowdon is in height.
when you're putting an aeroplane together, connie, how did you identify the different screws and that sort of thing?
when the plane was put together, it would be in the flight shed, across another field.
and where i worked, it was just components.
they were put on a shelf for us to part number, to engrave, and we put the number onto the parts that were going to go onto the aircraft.
they produced them pretty fast.
they used to take them from the factory and they'd put one in one place and another in another place.
they wouldn't put them all together because if there were raids, they would all have been bombed.
they also placed decoy lights on the hills above ben's home to divert german bombers looking for the factory.
they were bombing the mountains over here, which was alight for months and months on end.
they thought they'd got the factory, but they hadn't.
'the fabric is bonded to the metal frame by about 8,000 tiny bolts, and stitches tidy up the edges.
'eight stitches to the inch, and that's a whole lot of sewing you're looking at.'
you had to be careful when you were sewing that the stitches didn't alter the tension.
eight stitches to the inch.
on one occasion, i slipped up and my stitches had gone bigger, and the examiner wouldn't pass it.
if the wind should get through that, it could start to tear, so that was no good.
it had to be perfect.
so what happened?
i had to have it all back and unpick it.
i'll never forget that.
it took such a long while!
about 6,000 people were working on the broughton production line, half of them women.
the immediate boss over the main assembly was a woman, miss littler.
what was she like?
rather large...
there's a little pub just outside the factory where we used to go for a drink, and she used to sit there and drink pints.
i never saw her in a skirt.
she'd always got trousers on.
but she was very fair.
i was given a young girl to train to do my job, and i had her for a month, and it was like knocking sense into a wooden door.
there was nothing there, and she was holding me back.
so i complained to the foreman and he said i had to put up with it.
so i went to miss littler.
i won't tell you what she said, because she wasn't very... fussy about what language she used!
well, give me the blanks, then.
get rid of this so and so girl, she's holding this one back.
we can't have things like that, not these days.
because there was a war to win.
there was a war to win.
'back at the fuselage out of the tail, vera butler and her sister joan work together all the time.
'vera was a lady's companion before she started building bombers two years ago.
'here is the process of weatherproofing and strengthening the fabric'.
they used to go over it with this red dope.
i think it was about seven coats of dope and camouflage that went on the top.
when it was finished, it was like a drum.
just... strong enough to take the wind and whatever when it was flying.
there was girls sewing, and there was men spraying them with dope.
what did it smell like?
to me, pear drops or nail varnish.
if you do smell nail varnish, it takes you back.
for hilda dodd and the rest, there were often long walks home at the end of a 12-hour shift, in the dark and sometimes during an air raid.
i was with my dad in the street.
this very bright orange light came slowly down, and the policeman across the road shouted,
frank, get down on the floor!" and my dad said, "go on.
i said, "i can't, i've got a new dress on.
my mother will go mad." "get down!
and he lay on top of me, and this light kept coming and then, all of a sudden, there was a terrific explosion.
and all that you could hear was glass tinkling everywhere.
and i can see one dear soul now.
she had her corset tucked under her arm, covered in soot, and they were crying.
they were frightened.
and we were like, "come on in," and herding them all in the air raid shelter.
it was a dreadful night.
'this is phyllis evans, who was in service as a maid before the war.
'she is one of them fitting the fabric covering over the framework.'
what did you feel about germans at that time?
well, you wanted to beat them, didn't you?
well, i did.
my dad used to go mad.
i used to listen to lord haw-haw, and he used to frighten me to death.
'the royal air force is too weak.
'the royal navy is too weak.
and as yet, the common sense 'of the british people is too weak to perceive the catastrophic nature 'of the plight into which they have allowed churchill to lead them.'
i used to think, "i wish i could get hold of him.
what i would do to him," you know?
'germany calling, germany calling.'
he was very sarky with it, you know.
i used to think, "how does he get to know all this?
and my dad used to say, "if you don't stop listening to that man...
and he'd take the little wireless and switch it off.
wasting good battery.
on happier thoughts, what did you like on the radio?
i used to love arthur askey.
anything with a laugh.
i used to enjoy workers' playtime.
that came on every day.
it was bright, and it was dance music.
and one night, i was lucky to see tommy handley in itma.
it's that man again.
listening to him on the wireless, i used to love it.
all right, any more for ogshot, bagshot, beaufort, hookum, duckum and farham?
now, now, come, come, don't dilly dally!
no time for letting off steam.
to entertain the production line and to improve morale, the bbc broadcast lively dance tunes every day.
they called it, appropriately, music while you work.
what was your favourite music at that time?
i liked ivor novello and those sort of things.
and we had a show occasionally in the canteen at lunchtime.
different artists used to come and quite a lot of people in the factory did singing or dancing or whatever.
we had these little shows at lunchtime.
did you?
no.
i'm too shy.
'it's a habit in this factory to rather brazenly autograph one's work.
'so we know that blondie has had something to do with this bomber.'
how they ever flew, i never knew, because they were only aluminium and linen.
if you stepped off the catwalk up the middle of the plane, your foot went straight through!
i never knew how they got off the ground.
dear me.
'a tiny brunette, eva powell, who runs a crane away up there under the roof girders, 'brings an engine the length of the shop and gently lowers it to what they call the power egg.
'it looks like an egg, at that.
'norman martin over there was once third officer 'on the pleasure liner rawalpindi, 'before she was converted to a merchant cruiser.
'norman has been working on this type of engine for quite a time, 'and thinks it's the finest in the world.'
norman martin died in 1975.
his son, richard, had no idea that his father had worked on this record-breaking wellington ln514.
i remember him telling me that the roof cranes in the factory were all driven by women, which was unusual for that time, but i suppose that was born out of necessity.
i remember him telling me that he had a ford 8 and, driving there in the blackout one night, he crashed into a cow.
the cow was all right, but it didn't do the ford 8 any good.
did he get to work?
well, one assumes so.
he was british.
so yes, he got to work.
did he talk to you about the record attempt?
to be honest, no, but i did find a newspaper cutting he'd kept about it, albeit very tatty, but it is the newspaper cutting about that attempt.
i'm surprised that he never talked about it, but then i suppose, during the war, you didn't talk about it.
what was security like?
it was pretty strict.
even when we got our wages, the home guard used to stand there with their rifles while you got paid your money.
sometimes workers had to be escorted on to the airfield to the aircraft to correct last minute faults.
they used to take us out with an alsatian dog, the special police.
we called them the gestapo.
and we used to do our jobs and they used to escort us back, because they were all so secret.
'the time has come to bring the component parts together.
'this means that the various departments are delivering their finished sections 'to the main assembly.
now we'll see it take shape as a bomber.
'the fuselage is trundled down the factory at 6.15 in the evening, '9 hours and 15 minutes after the start.
'the cranes come lumbering overhead with the power eggs, 'which are gently and firmly lowered into place and connected up.
'next, the tail surfaces, 'the elevators and tailfin are lowered and connected.
'each part is installed by a swiftly moving expert team'.
we had people bussed from liverpool, from warrington, from wrexham.
as far as you were concerned, you were doing something to throw the bombs back at them, what they'd been throwing at you.
so there was that comradeship.
were there occasions when people simply didn't turn up for work?
yes.
there was a government department within the factory, and you had to fill an excuse form in and say what it was.
but if people persistently were absent?
they used to fine them.
fine them?
yeah, prosecute them.
some workers in some factories were very brave and hard-working, but quite a lot weren't.
there was an amazing number of strikes.
it was a hangover from the 1930s and 1920s.
industrial relations in britain had been disastrous.
management had been pretty poor too.
a lot of workers who had suffered through the depression, when the war came and their services were desperately needed, they couldn't see why the fact that we were fighting a war should stop them from using their opportunity
to get higher wages, to impose their demands.
churchill was absolutely appalled by a lot of what went on in the factories.
newspaper tycoon lord beaverbrook, as britain's minister of aircraft production, warned prime minister winston churchill in the winter of 1940, as these war cabinet papers reveal, that "the cumulative effect of enemy bombing is making itself felt on our production lines".
they were becoming "very thin".
i remember lord beaverbrook just walked round the factory and out.
usual thing.
and churchill was on the phone to the factory all the while.
beaverbrook also warned about absenteeism, the length of time production line workers spent in air-raid shelters, and the morale of the workforce.
we had some people directed down from scotland under the labour act at the time.
one or two didn't like it.
i don't know how they got on, but they weren't there for long.
they were shifted out.
everything was done to keep the men and women at work on the production line.
to help you stay in the factory, we had our own dentist there.
we even had our own barber there.
so you could never get a pass out to go and have a haircut.
we had a good surgery, with a doctor.
and that was to keep you on the production line?
keep you on the production line.
'this is the bomb beam, like a compact miniature bridge.
'look at the speed with which they set the bulletproof petrol tanks into the main plane.'
they had these special tanks that used to go in.
they were bulletproof.
self-sealing, actually.
'when this is done, the overhead crane picks up the wings and sweeps them into position, 'where skilful hands guide them into place.
'now the bomber is complete, with its 80ft wingspan.
'it won't be long now before this bomber is loaded with an outward-bound cargo for germany, 'at the rate they're going.'
tiny cooling flew 67 missions in bomber command, most of them on wellingtons.
in the air, that was where it belonged, and where you belonged in it.
and between you, you revelled in it.
he flew a wellington over dunkirk to protect the retreating british troops in 1940.
i remember peering down and looking at the battleground underneath.
you made damn sure to keep well clear of anywhere where our own troops were.
he flew his wellington over the occupied channel ports, as the germans then prepared to invade britain.
they were basically river ports, assembly places like rotterdam, where the barges would assemble.
and, really, what you were looking down at was an expanse of water in the quasi-moonlight.
and if there was any movement, you went for that.
it is 11 hours and 23 minutes since the record-breaking attempt began.
'the night workers arrive.
'at the same time, another crew is fitting the starboard propeller.
'the workers are beginning to make bets.
'after all, there are still 17 hours and 20 minutes to go 'in that 30-hour mark they've set themselves'.
eileen lindfield worked the night shift.
she had unofficial uses for any discarded felt left over from the fuselage covering.
the irish linen they covered the planes with, it didn't reach from one end of the plane to the other.
they just threw it down on the floor, and it was very sought after for curtains and everything.
we used to make slippers out of it.
nobody could buy anything.
it was all on coupons, and slippers were a luxury.
when people say they're hard-up now and go without, they don't know what the meaning of the word is.
the hardships people went through in the war
there was no water bottles, no cameras.
everything was on coupons.
it didn't matter how much money you had, you couldn't buy anything, because it was all for the war, you know.
'ivy bennett caught my eye.
'i noticed her because she was wearing a very sheer pink chiffon blouse.
'i remarked on it, but ivy grinned and said she'd come away from a party in a hurry 'so that she could get on this night shift 'and help to make this record-breaking bomber.'
do you remember going to dances and that sort of thing?
yeah, we did in the war, yes.
if the men were on leave, they were all in their uniform.
were there any liaisons that the husbands might have frowned upon?
well, i suppose so, but i don't think i got into any mischief.
we didn't have a lot of time, really.
we had the miners welfare institute in llay.
we had dances at the weekends.
but i couldn't misbehave, because my mother was always in the kitchen making tea.
she was always there, and i had to come home with her, so i couldn't misbehave if i wanted to.
i'm sure you didn't want to.
no, i didn't.
i was a good girl.
'the rear turret arrives on a portable crane.
'robert davies skilfully guides it into place.'
there was no idleness.
you got on with your jobs.
even lavatory breaks were strictly rationed.
there was a lady in charge, and you were allowed six minutes.
if you were longer than that, she'd come and bang on the door.
come on, your time's up!
one time, i wanted to go to a dance, which was not very often, and you didn't get your hair set, or anything, then.
so i thought, "what can i do?
so i took a comb and a little mirror in my overall pocket, and i flushed the toilet twice to make sure the water was clean, and i dipped my comb in, and i was setting my hair.
so i had to pretend i'd been to the toilet, but i hadn't.
did she bang on the door?
oh, yes. "come on, your time's up!
out you come!
but she didn't know what i'd been doing.
she hadn't twigged.
'before our unbelieving eyes, the bomber really looks like an aircraft.
'ernest tootle, who used to be a coach painter, applies the raf roundel on the fuselage and wing.
'i don't know where he gets that steady hand at three in the morning, 'for you'll notice that he does it freehand.
ernest tootle worked on wellingtons throughout the war.
he nearly lost his life in one of them, as his son peter remembers.
he'd been working inside the bomb hatch.
the bomb hatch was closed up, and he was working inside it.
and this plane was off down the runway with him in the bomb hatch.
he went for a few circles round the aerodrome in the bomb hatch!
can you tell me what he said?
well, i couldn't remember the exact words, but... there were a lot of stars and asterisks involved!
i don't know whether he thought he was going to die, but he was quite explicit with some of the things that he said.
ernest's grandson james now works in the same hangar in which his grandfather built wellingtons all those years ago.
james helps to build the wings of the giant, hi tech airbus.
i'm a manufacturing shop support engineer.
it's providing support to the operators manufacturing the wings.
if they have any problems, they come to us about issues they might have - if they've drilled holes in the wrong positions, oversized holes.
when you're on your placements around the factory, you get to see the billet of aluminium that the wing starts from, from start to end.
it's strange at broughton, because you're just seeing a wing.
you don't see the complete aircraft.
it'd be nice to see something from start to finish.
the broughton factory is the british partner in the long-established european airbus project.
it also involves factories in spain and germany and france.
once the wings are built here at broughton, they're transported by air and road to be assembled into the complete aircraft at toulouse in france.
does it ever cross your mind that your grandfather used to build wellington bombers in this place?
it was funny, cos a few weeks back, it was mentioned about the 24-hour bomber that was made.
but you can imagine now how different the factory is compared to what it was then.
'at half past ten at night, 'the landing wheels are installed - wheels 4.5ft high that weigh 300lb.
'meanwhile, further inspections are taking place 'and checked off on the progress charts as each detail is ok'd.'
wilf williams was 16 when he first enrolled at the broughton factory.
that weekend, he'd worked all day saturday on wellington ln514.
i came in at the second stage, after the fabric had been put over the fuselage.
i went home at 3 o'clock on saturday afternoon.
on the sunday morning,
i was very surprised to find it had left the production line and gone into the running shed.
'as the clock at the end of the assembly line points to 3.20, 'a tractor tows the bomber to the running shed.
'this is a is huge area at the end of the production line 'where final inspections and the first engine tests are made.'
curiously, in an affair that mainly concerned britain's fighter command, the wellington heavy bomber, unintentionally, was to play a vital role in the battle of britain.
in the summer of 1940, when britain and the commonwealth stood alone and at bay against the apparently irresistible might of nazi germany, the luftwaffe were weakening the raf's fighter command by bombing its airfields and radar stations,
and sometimes catching the fighters as they climbed to meet them.
the luftwaffe brought fighter command in the southeast of england very, very close to the edge of defeat by its attacks on airfields and radar stations.
by late august, things were very, very serious indeed.
then, by accident, some german bombs fell on the outskirts of london.
churchill was furious.
churchill insisted that the raf must retaliate against berlin.
and on the night of 24th/25th august, the wellingtons and some hampdens and whitleys set out for berlin.
very few of them dropped bombs even anywhere near anything that mattered, but they enraged hitler.
and hitler, from that moment, insisted that the luftwaffe shift its aiming point to major british cities
and it was one of the turning points of the battle of britain.
london suffered terribly.
the cost to londoners was enormous, but london could take it.
churchill described it as like a great, enormous wounded animal, but it could go on receiving punishment, whereas, if the luftwaffe had gone on attacking
fighter command airfields and radar stations, strategically, this would have been far, far more serious.
so that raf raid against berlin and others that followed did have a significant effect on the battle of britain.
it is 18 hours and 20 minutes since work began on wellington ln514.
'there is a feeling of high expectancy in the air, 'for there in front of us is what we think is the fastest job of bomber construction in the world.
'now, will it run?
they are only two complete wellington bombers in existence today.
this one, at the aeronautical museum at brooklands, was rescued from loch ness, where she'd crash-landed on december 31st 1940.
she ditched so gently that the crew were able to walk out onto the wings into their rescue dinghies and onto the scottish shore.
this aircraft was one of bomber command's main strike-force of wellingtons in the early years of the war.
bomber command continued to hit at berlin and other cities.
there was a wonderful moment later in the year, when the germans were trying to convince the russian foreign minister, molotov, that the british were beaten, that it was all over, and in the middle of a dinner at the russian embassy,
suddenly the air-raid siren goes - in berlin - and they all have to go down to the cellar.
and molotov enraged the germans by saying to them,
if the british are really beaten,
then why do we have this air-raid alarm?
and who is dropping these bombs?
and it was probably a wellington that did it.
'like seagulls following a liner, the workers tag after it to continue their jobs.
'from ivy bennett in her chiffon blouse, to george williams, who is almost blind, 'every one of these british men and women has given of his best.'
have you any idea, hilda, how many wellingtons you actually worked on?
crikey!
no.
you were doing miles and miles of machine work, so you just took each day as it came.
you just knew it was going towards making a bomber.
cos it did make you think, when you were doing them.
you used to wonder what happened to the bombers.
were they lucky or not?
tiny cooling piloted a wellington bomber into action 67 times.
my policy was, when i came up to the target, to have a good look around and to see what was going on and see which was the hottest place, and go and find one that was the quietest.
and if it was hot at 10,000ft, i'd drop down to 8,000, or something like that, and i used that throughout the war.
if you were briefed for a particularly hot place, you had this trepidation, a sort of...
well, i suppose you might say a windy feeling in the pit of the stomach, much like when you were a schoolboy waiting to go and see the dentist.
but as soon as you got in the aeroplane, it had gone.
do you think that applied to everybody?
i've no idea.
it's not a thing one talked about.
you never discussed fear?
no.
did others show fear?
not show it, no.
nobody ever showed it.
'then, at precisely 15 minutes past six on this sunday morning, 'exactly 21 hours and 15 minutes from the start of construction, 'the bomber is a complete fighting unit 'and sees the light of the first dawn of its lifetime.'
aircrew called the wellington the wimpy, because there was a legendary cartoon character of that period called j wellington wimpy.
and the wimpy was a term of terrific affection.
they loved this aeroplane.
they thought it was marvellous.
'so, like a gallery at a sporting event, the workers stand and watch.
'then comes the big moment.
'the engineer climbs into the cabin and the engines are started up for the first time.'
i can't think of any occasion when the aircraft let me down.
there might have been one or two occasions when one got into trouble through one's own fault.
believe you me, you just sort of let the aircraft take over and it would pull you out.
tiny cooling flew his 67 missions in wellingtons - more than two complete tours of duty - between 1939 and 1945 in europe, italy and the middle east.
in that time, more than 10,000 members of bomber command were killed in action.
you didn't stop to think about that.
why not?
because it wouldn't happen to you.
it might happen to the next chap on the next table, but it wouldn't happen to you.
'we all know that time is racing, but a generator and an airscrew need some last-minute adjustments.
'and there's a final bit of stitching to do.
this holds us up almost two hours.'
it was one of the toughest and most dangerous jobs in the war.
to complete a tour of operations, you had to do 30 trips.
and for a lot of the war,
bomber command was losing about 1 in 20.
that meant you had a better chance of dying than you did of surviving your 30 trips.
'everything has received its final test and ok and the bomber is ready for the takeoff.
'it's full daylight, and ten minutes to nine in the morning.
'ten minutes short of an exact 24-hour day 'that the finished bomber is rolled out onto the tarmac adjoining the factory.
'the record is going to be really shattered, and no mistake.'
in a way of course, in a wellington bomber, each member of the crew fought a slightly different war, because if you think of the rear gunner, he's miles away from you.
he is, yes.
you gave him a shout once in a while to say, "hi, tex.
you still awake?
the wireless operator is wrapped up in wires and earphones and god knows what, and never says anything to anybody.
the navigator's sort of in and out every few minutes with a chitty saying, "change course to this
or, "eta there," and that sort of business.
and bill, my bomb-aimer, was the man who stood beside me in the well whilst i flew and who, if i got stiff or needed to pee or something like that,
i'd say to bill, "take over for five minutes, would you?
i'd get out of the seat and he'd climb in and he'd fly it for a while.
and there was this total reliance, one upon the other, that you never even questioned their ability to do what you asked them, or whether they would give you to the utmost if required.
is that a definition of love?
in a sense, yes.
in the shakespearean sense, yes.
i never cease to be deeply moved by what those very young men did and the letters they left behind them.
in the last year of the war, tiny cooling wrote a poem.
..i dare not look for my own it should be there...
..was he 20 when he came into my room
and cried like a child the night bob hewitt died
leaving a pregnant wife?
naylor was a young navigator.
and i remember lying in bed one morning
i think we'd just come back from a place like cologne or something - and there was a tap on the door, and young naylor walked in and stood at the foot of my bed.
he just fell to his knees, buried his face in the blankets of my bed and cried, and i said, "what's up?
he said, "bob hewitt's missing.
everybody liked young naylor, but nobody took the blindest bit of notice of him because he didn't look as if he'd been out of his pram more than a few days.
was there anything you could say to comfort him?
no, no, no, not really.
it was just the luck of the game.
it required a very special kind of courage to fly with bomber command.
in the most literal sense, they died with their shoes clean because they had a very cosy, comfortable, cosseted life at their bases in england.
they were nicely fed.
they had bacon and eggs before they took off.
some of them were able to live in quarters with their wives.
and then they would, every night, get in these planes and fly out from these calm, still norfolk and lincolnshire fields into the darkness over germany, into the whitest teeth of war.
these brightly coloured lights went shooting past, and there seemed to be lots of them straight ahead, and as we got up to them, they seemed to part and let us through.
then, all of a sudden, there was a smack.
flak guns, night-fighters and searchlights.
they were seeing their mates being shot down every night.
i remember calling out to dougie, "we've been hit.
and he said, "where?" and i told him.
he said, "keep an eye on it.
and they would go through this fantastically intense and terrifying experience for six, eight hours.
a few minutes later, he said, "anything to see?" and i said, "no, it's dead quiet.
he said, "all right, fine.
we'll be home in an hour.
wait until we get down and we'll have a look.
and then they would come back.
this calm, quiet lincolnshire or norfolk airfield.
i could smell petrol.
it was dripping from the self-sealing tank on the starboard side.
and dougie saying to me, "oh, we're back in time before the bars close.
come on, i'll buy you a beer to mark your first trip.
they'd go to the mess, they'd have the bacon and eggs, then two nights later, they'd be asked to do the same thing again... but usually with two or three less of the crews than had gone out the previous night.
'here comes the test pilot, 'a really amazed man.
'he was planning to fly the bomber this afternoon.
'but so fast has this aircraft been completed 'that they got him out of bed to put the bomber through its paces.'
i was told that they'd gone to fetch the pilot and, obviously, he didn't expect it to be so quick.
and i think his words were, "i hope to god they haven't missed anything.
everything went like clockwork.
i was really overwhelmed, but i was fascinated as well, to think that you could start a plane and then it could go down the line and actually fly.
we all went out onto the tarmac to watch the scene.
everybody was pleased that they'd done it.
i mean, there were no parties that i can remember, or anything like that, like.
the whole factory saw it take off.
they were all outside to watch it.
that must have been quite a moment?
oh, it was, really.
'here it comes.
and the bomber is airborne.
the record?
'yes, they broke it, those workers.'
what was that moment, when it took off?
there was a great, big round of applause and shouting.
he did a few circuits.
so we were very pleased with that.
it was a job well done.
airbus marked this unique occasion with an official photograph.
so, on the count of three, let's go for it.
one, two, three!
everybody wave.
now, here's the hard one.
wave and smile!
ok?
wave and smile!
let's go for it.
wave and smile!
for these people, this was simply a 24-hour snapshot of their lives during world war ii.
but the war was to last six years.
their men came home eventually.
and for the women who had built wellington ln514, life changed yet again.
did you continue to work at broughton?
no.
i had the sack!
i was made redundant.
a few weeks later, they turned over to prefabricated houses.
the girls that were single, they were kept on.
but i was married and i had to finish.
how did you feel about that?
a bit annoyed, actually.
i signed on the dole.
i had dole for three weeks and that's the only thing i've ever had off the government.
and because i wouldn't go to bolton to work in the cotton factory, they stopped me dole.
so what did you do?
lived on my army allowance until harry came home.
what was that day like, when he did come home from the war?
there was no telephones in those days.
i was outside the local church, watching a wedding.
and my mother was there, and she went home for something and she said,
i think you'd better go home.
harry's at home waiting for you.
and i got a little cottage ready for when he come home.
the people he worked for before the war, they got a little estate, and there was two little cottages on it, and i had one.
it was furnished, ready, when he came home.
me dad came home christmas morning.
did either of them ever talk about what they did in the war?
no.
did it affect harry?
never the same again.
hilda dodd's percy came home in 1944.
oh, well, i was over the moon.
couldn't believe it, you know?
it was wonderful.
it's a very funny feeling after three-and-a-half years and then i thought, "i wonder if he's gone off me.
or whether he still likes me!
he hadn't altered much, to me.
he had fair hair, but he was fairer and he was a well-built lad.
and he came in and he was hungry and he cooked himself egg and bacon, and of course when his mum got up
oh," she said, "i see you've had some breakfast.
he'd only eaten the whole rations for the week!
he didn't know!
throughout the war, percy carried with him this photograph of hilda.
he brought it back with him at the end of the war?
yes.
i have the photograph, and when he showed it me, i said, "ooh, it's coloured.
because i sent it just ordinary.
he said, "yes.
don't ever lose this," he said.
i treasure this." i said, "why?
he said, "well, one of my mates had his hands blown off.
he held a brush in his mouth and tinted it up.
i was very upset about it at the time, but i've never parted with it.
it doesn't seem to lose any of its colour.
eileen lindfield found it hard to adjust to the reappearance in her life of her husband stan.
we were so independent, and the women did a man's job and they behaved like men... and i think it took us a little while to sort of get going.
i'm glad i experienced the war, but i wouldn't like to think it happening again.
nobody wins a war, so better without.
over a single weekend, from first bolt to last, these workers built this wellington bomber in 10 minutes less than 24 hours.
they smashed the existing world record by a whole day.
wellington ln514 took off 24 hours and 48 minutes into the workers' weekend.
tiny cooling flew his wellington into action over germany and france,
belgium and egypt, sicily and italy, 67 times.
it was always nice when the word came up from under your feet, saying, "bomb's gone!
the navigator would be up almost before the words were out of bill's mouth.
saying, "course to steer.
he'd set us on the compass and you'd weave your way home.
and you'd see the flare paths flickering ahead, and you'd come in on a final approach, and that lovely softness as you closed your engines down on finals, and felt for the ground.
and the good old wimpy just let you down, like a babe on a cushion.
and that was another one over.
in all, during world war ii,
british factories turned out 11,461 wellington bombers.
__file_terminal__
but who's introducing?
i'm introducing!
when all is said and done, is silent film dead or not?
if it's dead, it makes no sense to use intertitles.
so, i prefer, "47: the deadman who speaks".
the production of this film has been made with enthusiasm and zeal by my nice friend, alessandro blasetti.
thank you.
don't mention it.
no need for compliments between us.
also, carlo montuori, cinematographer;
maestro pietro sassoli;
giovanni paris, sound technician;
mario pompei, set designer.
and now we come to the three graces.
no, sorry!
of the graces, we have only one and that's grazia del rio.
here she is, seen and taken.
of course, for this movie i got a good reward.
i am not speaking of wages, i'm talking about mercedes brignone!
elma krimer!
do you understand what she said?
no?
let me explain.
she said,
any ballyhoo that i do, well, i won't dish.
but i warn you, i've no clue where i'll finish.
let me say, that today, may not be something new.
so don't say, 'hey' or look grey, if you think there's a mistake or two.
because there are never mistakes.
an unforgettable actor with his original voice, reproduced from some of the first sound films.
for ettore petrolini, living
he who left us, said:
i'm convinced that when an actor disappears, everything disappears with him.
and since i love longevity,
i think that if i pass away, when you hear me or see me or read me, i'll be able to return and i shall live again.
and if i were convinced that when they speak of me, i could return to hear it?
would that not be enough, even if it were an illusion?
but yes, yes!
this nonsense is infusing in me a feeling of discontent.
i'm going to cry out!
yeah, take it to your wardrobe!
# pulcinella did have, did have..
# what nobody else had.
# pulcinella had a rooster, all day he went a-riding. #
pulcì!
old hen!
this is no time for jests!
this letter warns me that my farm is in flames!
oh!
how nice, how nice!
nice?
stop strumming and get to the farm.
what's with you?
for now, you'll have to be like a second father to my daughter.
and to my maid, a second master.
you already know there hangs the soul of..
your mama?
no.
your sister?
no, the soul ..
whose soul is it then?
the weapon, the rifle, the shotgun!
oh, shoot!
shoot!
remember, nobody must be let in!
for my daughter, a second father.
don't worry.
for my maid, a second master.
master!
i'll go, but be back.
goodbye!
oh, my!
farewell, my son!
my poor son!
oh, mama mia!
the pain that poor thing feels!
he goes to a farm in flames, my poor boy!
oh, the pain!
pulcinella!
get inside!
no!
get inside!
no!
you'll need to remember that for you i'm like a second father and for you a second master.
then i become your father, your mother, and your grandpa.
get inside or you'll feel my authority!
oh!
pulcinella?
what's this?
if you let us go out, i'll give you a plate of macaroni.
mama mia!
macaroni!
for a little stroll, two plates of macaroni.
oh, double mama mia!
no, sir!
you must stay inside.
father and master!
pulcinella!
how's this?
i'm talking before me and i hear a voice from behind me.
voice of god!
i'll give you such a scene!
such a scene!
now, i know what to do!
i'll lock them inside and they won't get out anymore.
naughty!
and mischievous!
night is coming.
march!
overflowing with pain!
i came here to relieve myself.
what, do you take me for a maternity ward or a hospital?
eh?
no.
i'm burning.
fine, call the firemen to cool you off.
i burn with love for the maiden who lives in there.
in there, you cannot pass.
pulcinella, i'll hang myself!
well, go hang but i'll still shoot!
no!
watch out for the dog.
the dog!
where's a dog?
the dog.
where's a dog?
pulcinella!
the.. the.. muzzle low.
muzzle low.
who's "muzzlelow"?
no!
the butt..
i'll butt you!
what do you want?
you can't pass!
and you can't enter!
i'm the second master and father!
watch out, i'll shoot!
pulcinella..
what's this?
can you be seduced?
fine.
take my virtue.
now what?
what kind of guardian am i?
pulcinella?
what's this?
if don pasquale comes, how will you warn me?
ah, you're right!
i'll tell him that you're a painter and that you came to do a portrait.
and then i'll sing a song that goes:
# the shepherdess who comes from outside..
and you escape.
you understand?
what insight!
and what talent!
what talent!
what a talent, what talent, what talent!
now when don pasquale comes, i must sing this song:
# the shepherdess who comes from outside..
forgive me, don pasquale!
ah!
it's you!
i won't come out anymore!
how odd he is!
he's really a fool!
it's meet what you do!
truly a faithful servant!
meat?
yes, meet.
beef?
no!
your actions are meet.
you're a loyal instrument!
an instrument?
a cello?
what cello?
but have you just now come back?
yes, exactly this moment.
how did your business go?
all went well.
it went well there?
nothing happened.
did you have fun out there?
yes, quite.
and that one doesn't come out!
and you remember that song that goes:
# the shepherdess who comes from outside..
yes, i know it.
want to sing it?
# the shepherdess who comes from outside..
i know it.
if i don't project my voice, that one will never come out.
# the shepherdess who comes from outside..
i know it.
then why don't you sing it?
do you remember when we went to see that opera?
in the theater, there was the tenor who did that opera..
what was it called?
"the two foscari".
huh?
"the two foscari".
i only saw one of them.
no.
two.
two foscari.
the tenor had such a voice!
it was excellent.
such a voice!
and then they called out..
it was a frenzy!
a frenzy!
they applauded.
of course!
what were the people saying?
come out!
oh, god, poor thing!
why are these two here?
the tenor..
and the prima donna, no?
have mercy on a poor man!
blind in one leg and crippled in one eye!
no, pasquale.
the day is done, time has shed its light.
you too must shed light in your head.
forgive and let him marry your daughter.
my papa, i swear that i won't do it again!
why, you want to do it again?
what behavior is this?
no!
this is an unqualified ambush, an unqua..
qua, qua, qua, qua, qua, qua.
how strange you are, like a chicken!
i don't want to know nothing!
this is an insult.
i don't want to know anything.
be good, tell him yes!
no!
tell him yes!
ok, be fruitful and multiply.
ah!
my bones!
no, no.
pasquale!
to be truly sweet..
you still have to give me permission.
for what?
i'd like to nibble a bit with the maid.
have you been up to this too?
where's the harm?
she's so beautiful!
how precious!
how pretty!
she looks like the mona lisa.
oh, alright!
you know what i'd like to have?
a little family.
are you happy?
how could i not be happy?
my cucumber!
cucumber?
pulcinella!
then, we'd like to say this:
we play the bells, the firework do light, we trip the light fantastic, the entire night.
and to this lovely audience who gave us an ear, a hundred salutations and kisses quite dear!
bravo!
encore, encore!
one moment, one moment.
one moment.. one moment.
yes, yes!
but no pulcinella!
no pulcinella.
pulcinella is out of the program.
it's not part of my repertoire.
it is not even a slip on the stage.
it's love for the traditional commedia dell'arte.
now, i work on commission.
the ladies in the boxseats..
who if i'm not mistaken, we're entertained, do they have any preference for my repertoire?
giggi er bullo"!
"the sausages!
the magician"!
one moment, one moment!
one moment.
what do you want? "the sausages"?
"the magician"!
yes.
sausages with spinach?
one little moment.
i'll do everything you want.
if you want, i'll even bring your trunks to the station.
now, in order to please all of you..
i'll do what pleases me!
hey, call the comedian, the curtain's going up.
yes, a moment.
melancholy..
with tomato sauce and oregano.
whenever i take a stroll down the street, people..
smile at me.
women smile at me.
but this isn't bragging.
those smiles..
are the continuation of the hilarity at the theater ignited, for the comedy i just recited, for the nonsense that delighted.
this isn't bragging.
yes..
i could brag..
because i am a man who's a pleasure to remember, who stirs up pleasant memories.
if my memories were as pleasant..
as i am a man who's a pleasure to remember, it would be a pleasure for me too.
but, alas, it's not so.
what a bitter disappointment!
what a terrible mortification!
instead, i would like that a woman..
seeing me..
god!
how i would love that!
am i telling you this?
yes.
i'm on the verge of telling you.
i want to say it.
fine.
i will tell you.
i swear that all my sins i'd atone, if you'd smile at me and me alone.
turning his thoughts to it entirely, forgetting the little salami.
women don't care though i'm a crooner.
it's not me they look at, but the piano tuner.
what a damn scoundrel you are, if you're gigetto!
but how nice you are, when you're gastone!
gastone..
is a savage satire of a photogenic actor, exhausted, sorry, white with powder and vice.
empty, without any horror of himself.
gastone the diseur, the danseur, a man ruined by the war.
always sought after.
sought after for his conversation, sought after for his dress, sought after by the police.
the divo of the music hall, the fine speaker, the aristocratic singer, the three hours worth of a good time, the laughter, laughter, laughter.
author, interpreter of his repertoire, the creator.
to create means to put something in the world that was not there before.
i come from a family of creators:
my father, an inventor.
he invented a machine to cut butter:
a trifle out of nothing:
a piece of wood with a piece of wire.
this is my little thing here.
i invented it.
i haven't even patented it.
it's in the public domain.
my brother is an inventor too.
now he has invented a device..
for the destruction of mosquitoes.
it's an contraption with a sling.
you wind it up and unleash it out the window and it goes, "pst, pst, pst.
the lady mosquito in the room, hearing, "pst, pst, pst
goes outside thinking to find a man mosquito.
taking advantage of the moment, you close the window.
it's over.
it's over here.
it's irretrievably over.
# gastone, you're an adonis truly.
# gastone,
# gastone.
# gastone, i have a profusion of women.
# and i'm making a collection.
# gastone, gastone.
bravo!
oh!
my rump!
my shoulders!
what a blow!
oh, idiots!
finally, are you a doctor, yes or no?
but yes, i'm a doctor, two doctors, three doctors.
i'm a pharmacist, an apothecary..
anything you want!
then, i'll get the horses.
pray, who is this object?
the nurse.
oh, i'm so happy, nubile nurse!
i'm enraptured by this meeting!
and my medicine is the humble slave of your nursing.
and i'd like to be the lucky brat..
who suckles the milk from your good graces.
all my remedies, all of my science is at your disposal, oh nubile nurse.
excuse me, mr. doctor!
ease off.
i wasn't easing on, was i?
i'm her husband!
and so?
aren't you content to be the husband?
you also want to give orders?
it is the office of a doctor to visit the dairy of the family.
and now if you please, announce my fee.
# let's go, lucinda, truly you do, # me a great honor to cure someone like you.
# you other, magnates, it's the truth i do tell, # waiting with anxiety to speak to her for a spell.
# quiet, quiet, quiet, quiet, silent, silent, oh, what horror!
# and so delicious, fine, fine.
# a woman who doesn't speak is worth a treasure.
# lucindina, how modest!
i'll make you talk without a head.
# if you don't talk, we'll faint.
and not till friday, we'll awake.
# lucindina, how modest!
i'll make you talk without a head.
# if you don't talk, we'll faint.
and not till friday, we'll awake.
# long live, lucindina!
# mute maiden!
# now you have someone to help you:
#the great doctor!
hippocrates said..
that we must put on our hats.
where does he say that?
in his chapter on hats.
if you please,
is this the patient?
oh, no!
she's the wetnurse of my child.
you have a child?
of course!
why?
what?
do you know the father of your child?
but..
although, if you have the certitudine, go ahead and raise it.
# the honor, the favor, to wait for her here.
# you other, magnates, it's the..
# quiet, quiet, quiet, quiet, silent, silent, oh, what horror!
# and so delicious, fine, fine.
# a woman who doesn't speak is worth a treasure.
# long live, lucindina!
# mute maiden!
# now you have someone to help you:
#the great doctor!
and now if you please, introduce me..
into the room..
of the corpse.
here's a fine sick maiden..
who a healthy man could get used to with all of his heart.
you've made her laugh!
i touched her on the chinny chin.
so, what pains do you feel?
a..
e..
i..
u..
let us summarize.
a..
e..
i..
i got it!
she ate a spelling book.
she's become mute.
for this reason we delayed the wedding.
and why did you delay?
who is that blockhead of a husband who wants his wife to speak?
doctor!
use all of your science!
i'll use it.
do you feel very upset?
very much!
very good.
what?
because when the sick are very sick, that means they're less sick.
these are words that cicero has said.
do you understand latin?
no.
do you understand latin?
no.
cabrigia sarcituras..
nominativo ales.
muse.. muzala bonam etiam si quaram..
etesubstantivo,eteadiectivo..
aeterum rum ete concordum et casus.
now, these vapors..
coming to pass in the left side where we have the heart..
it occurs at the lung, which in greek which is called "hormian"..
having communication with the brain which in latin we call "cubile"..
met in that way the aforesaid vapors..
that fills the ventricle with the shoulder blade, for whose bones, bands repiti nechipitibus..
and that's why your daughter is mute.
put her abed..
and put her achair.
a single cure is possible:
the cure idropolosichinoterapeutica..
conmassaggioturcoeginnasticabolero., onde causes the rotondificapidudinigrazione..
of the part.
sir, i'd like to pay you for your trouble.
what are those vulgar sounds?
i can't take any.
sir!
what do you take me for?
please!
not at all.
please!
there, it's done.
are they all good?
i'm not a mercenary doctor..
and interest doesn't rule me at all.
the pulse is not working.
but i'm not sick, sir.
you are not sick..
and you have the audacity to present yourself before a surgeon?
go and get a disease!
i would like to ask you a favor:
i'm in love with lucinda.
and her father wants to marry her to another.
do you dare call upon me to be of service in your love?
sir..
lower.
lucinda's sickness..
is an invention to get rid of a loathed marriage.
sir, you've made me feel an inconceivable tenderness..
and i at the risk of using up all my medicine either will kill the patient..
sir!
or will be at your service.
now, listen to me:
i will give you the proper instructions.
so, remember my instructions.
but i don't know anything.
neither greek, nor latin nor medicine.
you don't know anything about medicine?
no.
wait here a moment.
now you're a doctor.
i have never had any other degree.
what?
you're not a doctor?
no.
no, i'm not and i've never been, but if it goes on like this,
i'll stay in medicine the rest of my life.
a doctor's career is not really so difficult.
because in all cases..
it's always the patient's fault who goes to the other world without your doctor's advice.
what's beautiful about our profession..
is that you'll never hear a corpse complain..
about the doctor that killed him.
cover the father's eyes.
who's that?
a bodysnatcher.
a body..
..snatcher.
oh!
but he's not here to snatch the dead, but to snatch the living.
he's the apothecary.
draw near.
did you bring..
your ointment?
take your time.
do you want to..
listen to his instructions?
i recommend: dilution, profusion, and thenceforth ablution.
do you know hippocrates?
of course not.
hippocrates was a great man.
hippocrates was hippocrates!
and now there are many hypocrites today.
but a hypocrite like hippocrates, can't be found.
attention!
no!
i'm not capable of changing my opinion.
the miracle of science!
my daughter speaks!
speaks!
i recovered my speech only to tell you that i'll marry none but leandro.
oh!
what speech!
rebellious daughter!
any argument is useless.
i want it so, and so it will be!
what a flow of words!
doctor, make my daughter mute again!
no.
i prefer..
to make deaf..
the parent.
unharness me.
don't take offense.
i'll medecinize this little business.
so, you have well understood:
take an "escape" purgative mixed with the "marry" pills.
have you well understood?
go medicinize her.
in the garden, i'll wait under the trout tree.
never will leandro marry my daughter!
never!
ever!
never!
forever.
master!
your daughter has eloped with leandro!
he's the traitor here!
prevent his escape!
i'll have him hanged!
forgive!
yes, forgive, i say!
forgive!
forgive, yes.
forgive!
i can already see the bars of my horrible prison!
the candles!
the torches of my funeral!
my dead body!
my dead hiney!
one moment!
sir, i didn't want to kidnap your daughter.
i would like to receive her from your hands.
the death of my uncle has left me heir to all his wealth.
then, i'll give you my daughter's hand.
medicine has had a narrow escape!
ah!
rascal!
beggar!
rogue!
look where morality ends up!
for you, i'll be your servant.
for you, i'm still the doctor!
for this kind public, you're humble actor!
i am a man of aesthetics, asthmatic, lymphatic, cosmetic.
i love libya, the balboa in the garden of certain women.
they are breezy, easy, sneezy at the speakeasy.
i have a special fondness for "the girl of the west", the north pole and flypaper.
# but everything that i am, i couldn't tell you.
# to show i'm no good, i'll prove in my song. #
# i'm a man graceful and mellow.
i'm a lucky fellow.
# i'm healthy and sane.
i'm an airplane.
# i'm quite terrible, i'm a dirigible.
# i trod on the sod.
i'm a lightening rod.
# i'm one without a flaw.
i'm 24.
# i'm quite consummate.
i'm illegitimate.
# i'm observant.
i'm the son of a servant.
# i'm without conceit.
i take my coffee sweet.
# i'm asymmetric.
i'm apoplectic.
# i'm a scorpio.
i'm an eskimo.
# i'm worth little.
i like to scribble.
# i have no quota.
i'm a pagoda.
# i weigh a gram.
i'm a telegram.
# i'm from istanbul.
i'm a parasol.
# if you don't get this, i've bronchitis.
# i'm condescending.
i'm unending.
# i'm of the league.
i'm a blitzkrieg.
# i do everything well.
i'm a scoundrel.
# but everything that i am, i couldn't tell you.
# to show i'm no good, i'll prove in my song. #
encore, encore, encore!
an encore, no!
now is the time to transform myself..
and finish it with nero.
some light buzzing.
# long live the sparkling wine, of frascati and marino.
# live forever the sparkling asti, the champagne and the bordeaux.
# among the eating and drinking, with women close beside, # we'll be entertained on the springs of the sofa.
# long live the sparkling wine, of frascati and marino.
# live forever the sparkling asti, # the champagne and the bordeaux.
# among the eating and drinking, with women close beside, # we'll be entertained on the springs of the sofa.
ave, caesar!
ave!
ave, ave.
what's so funny?
never seen an emperor?
# where am i?
who is this mob, # watching me?
but where do i find myself?
# heaven!
what do i see?
my vision dazzles.
# is it an old world or is it a new world!
# they've just dug me up.
oh, oh..
# oh, la la la.
# but i do not know how to explain it well, # if i came here by myself, or if they sent for me.
tomorrow, if you go to stores to purchase this article in the cathedral, you'll find that it's cheap.
i work in the public square, for the bomb norcia company.
i want to spit blood but i can't.
stand back, boy, let me work!
not for your needs, because needs, we already have enough, thank god.
tell me, 4 is too much, 3 is too much, it's still expensive.
how much do you sell?
a pound per meter!
toh!
take it away, let them see.
if you don't like it, we have other articles.
oh, the old days of brave warriors!
hearts of steel and tempers of glass.
where is that muzio, good old muzio.
muzio!
muzio scaevola, who fought the etruscans, so strong, he put his hand in the fire and let it burn!
but is that story true?
the historians say so.
sounds like a tale for the fireplace.
and the rule of atilius regulus?
a rule that you nor i have ever observed.
what a time!
that golden age of the great ulysses!
the most fearless warrior who ever lived to fight.
times sung by homer and 'bignose' ovidius, and later by virgil, and then nero, the famous singer.
mucrone, would you like a drink.
give me a drink.
would you fancy, listening to my latest verse?
now!
the tench fish said to the pike:
'what are you doing, oh pike?
replied the pike:
'i do what i like.'
moral:
or tench, or pike, do what you like.
well!
bravo!
we want him undressed.
gourmet!
moral:
who falls gets hurt.
you can't spell service without vice.
but this is the imperial triclinium and i do not see poppea.
there's poppea?
do not be jealous:
poppea is no longer popping.
where's poppea?
what is it?
you wanted me, dear caesar?
greatly!
i longed for you.
hi, matron!
hail!
hail and thunder!
no longer matron, but godmother now, huh?
ripe as fruit in autumn, worthy of being immortalized in marble by phidias.
too bad you put on weight!
melius est abundare deficere quam.
unlike you, you're bones, skins, nerves, but flesh.. nothing!
tell me, do you want to take a walk?
yes.
und spazieren?
yes.
space enough..
are you tired?
nein.
nein?
my biggest darling, give me a kiss.
you will always be my chick?
and acte and calvia?
they're only substitutes.
i can't stand them.
well, let's have some fun by abolishing them.
take 100 slaves from acte, and give them to poppaea.
thank you.
i withdraw.
then i withdraw too.
ave.
bye, caesar.
bye, caesara, see you tonight.
and i?
and how shall i cope without the slaves?
careful or i'll give you one in the face to send you to that post!
pluto's tail, i am jealous!
by the navel of nebuchadnezzar!
watch yourself!
where there's smoke, there is fire..
there is fire..
did someone light a fire?
hamilcar?
hamilcar.
take her away from me, before i crush her, splinter, pulverize her, like the glass of a watch between the gears of a dynamo.
hail, caesar augustus!
petronius, the arbiter of taste.
# what news..
do you bring me?
christians..
how many times have i told you,
i do not want you to enter the triclinium with a pipe in the mouth?
you took the triclinium for a smoking room?
hm?
by the poet!
and you who are the poet and artist, you smoke like a steam engine.
if i do not hit you on the head, it's because the top hat is mine.
caesar, the population complains!
they want bread, oil, sesterces.
says terces?
who is terces?
chastise these ignorant plebeians, is the advice of tigellinus.
tigellinus, are you there?
stay.
let's..
let's burn rome, and rebuild it in reinforced concrete.
what do you think of my plan?
yes.
it'll take courage.
well, i'll go.
are you leaving?
i wanted to dismiss you, it's even better if you're already going.
hamilcar!
here, burn all of rome, make it a fire well done.
caesar, i go.
go.
# go, go and come back soon, i'll wait here.
farewell!
mucrone!
mucrone, bring me my lyre.
caesar, it sounds false.
of course it is false..
that's why it's called a li-ar.
but no matter:
brilliant people will improvise without the lire.
music and words worthy of nero.
piripi, piripi, piripi!
poropò, poropò, poropò!
parapira, parapappa, piraparapappa, piraparapappa, piraparapappapà!
i'm composing the second part.
parapiraparapappapà, pappapà, pappapà!
oh, oh, oh..
pom, pom, pom..
i forgot to close the tap.
pom..
tigellinus, the empire is mine.
when you want to poop, make your own empire.
lie down.
let's return to antiquity, that would be progress.
a fire!
what?
all of rome!
light of helios!
don't you know that was my order?
beard of copper!
why did you do this?
because rome is mine!
but what about my savings!
save my savings!
but i am not the fire brigade.
wait!
i must make a call.
speaking?
speaking!
of course!
if i am speaking you must be listening.
you're receiving me?
oh!
what reception!
ha ha ha.
no, miss, connect me to the station..
no, no!
the fire station.
huh?
right now?
all right, go ahead.
what is it?
they're coming.
this is it?
no, but they're coming.
already coming.
oh!
i admire your diligence.
yes, i'm speaking with the fire fighters, you fine fighters!
yes, it's burning!
this is mr. nero, from the palatine, yes!
what is burning?
a fire, of course!
do not forget, huh?
make a knot in your the handkerchief, tell your friends when they arrive!
huh?
no!
you're lying!
intentionally!
no!
what is it?
tell me it's not true!
it's not true!
what?
no!
he says a firefighter came and left an umbrella, look..
huh?
but no!
these are burning matters!
death to the arsonist!
death!
they fight!
but no, it's there.
it's the people!
what..
what does this vile multitude want?
mama mia!
we want your blood!
take butter's blood!
butter, lend me your blood, come!
see?
when you need it most, the butter melts away.
tigellinus, would you burn for me?
do you not fear my death will make the praetorians revolt?
death to the mother-killer!
death!
death to the mother-killer?
i am an orphan!
caesar, why do you not flee?
enough.
the public must forgive me this professional flirting.
at times like this, the actor disappears,..
and vanity takes over, the vanity of technical theater and cinema.
these internal choruses i seem to have done well, right?
but the public did not take them.
i will repeat them.
do it again.
death to the mother-killer!
death!
for what i pay them, they do miracles.
i'll make them do it a dozen times.
caesar.
what is it?
they want to kill you.
but why?
to make you pay for starting the fire!
but why?
who told you that?
they told me so.
they will make me pay?
yes.
but no!
i am insured against fire!
talk to the people!
wait, i'll talk to the people.
how exciting, addressing the crowd!
no!
those guys want money!
ah!
wait!
what an idea!
the people are mine!
i hold them in my hand!
3!
6!
7!
8!
4!
9!
you see?
it is the people!
make them play, and they bite the bait!
look: 5!
7!
8!
7!
another pint to be refilled!
6!
stupid!
ignoble mob, is this the reward for the sacrifices made for you?
go home, prove yourselves men, and tomorrow rome will be reborn more beautiful and magnificent than before!
bravo!
thanks!
you like this word, 'before'?
the people love it when they hear difficult words.
i will repeat it to them:
more beautiful and magnificent than before.
bravo!
thanks!
more beautiful and magnificent than before!
bravo!
thanks!
more beautiful and magnificent than..
bravo!
more beautiful..
bravo!
thanks!
beautiful, thank you!
bravo!
thanks!
bravo!
you!
thank!
bravo!
thanks!
bravo!
you see?
the people, when they often say that you are good, will say so even if you do nothing.
look.
brrr!
to you and your grandfather.
tomorrow, tomorrow..
how many tomorrows are there in one month?
tomorrow there will be large distributions, of wine, oil, of flypaper, and sesterces.
bread and circles.
bread and circuses!
look who's speaking gibberish!
but i am made of stronger stuff!
i will give you everything, as long as you don't ask for anything!
now go, beloved rabble!
death!
no!
encore!
this little applause was a little weak, if i'm not mistaken.
just think of the sacrifice: to wash off nero and present myself in this manner.
thank you, thank you.
good!
i like things that are sincere, spontaneous, natural.
given that the applause is my pay, i'll make do with a dozen more.
# look at the sun, which has come out, nanni, # the scent of roses, of carnations and pansies.
# how everything is paradise!
the castelli are like that!
# look at frascati, where is all one smile, # one delight, one love, one beauty which enchants.
# you see, here's marino, the festival of the grape.
# fountains that pour wine, what an abundance there is.
# nearby there's genzano with picturesque arbano.
# let's go there, nanni!
nanni!
# what a night that has stars..
# that mantle the sky with gold.
# and the young girls from velletri begin to sing.
# a folk song is sung, responding with a refrain.
# what a chorus, you'll hear, nanni!
nanni!
english subtitles by sineintegral, spinynorman and edam17@kg.
__file_terminal__
ladies and gentlemen, we are flying smoothly over shizuoka...
please sit back, relax and have a pleasant flight.
what the...
tower!
we just had a near miss encounter with an unidentified aircraft.
do you copy?
roger that.
that was stark industries' ceo on board his corporate jet.
i think he's a little ahead of his flight schedule.
tony stark?
that was iron man.
#1 :
japan enter iron man
the land of the rising sun...
it all begins here.
i'm sorry, i just didn't expect the head of lab 23 and my right-hand man in japan to be a young woman, and such a pretty one at that.
allow me to say, sir, that it's an honor to be working with the man behind iron man.
so where to first?
you have a meeting with the minister of defense at 8:00.
meeting?
come on, let's do something fun.
l was thinking maybe we could grab a bite if you're hungry.
time is money.
l can see you have a lot to teach me, doctor.
i'd like to hire you as my personal secretary.
welcome to japan, mr. stark.
l appreciate you taking the time to greet me personally.
thank you.
that is the yokosuka naval base, and behind it is the u.s. military base, right?
by the way, i'm sorry for all of this.
l truly wish i had the time to give you a proper tour of kyoto.
not at all.
l couldn't ask for a more incredible view.
it's inspiring to see our two countries working together toward a common goal.
l couldn't agree more.
l can't thank you enough for giving me the opportunity to build an arc station in japan.
l honestly believe that this could be the first step toward world peace.
l hope so.
but tell me, mr. stark.
are the rumors true?
are you retiring as iron man?
there are rumors, but i wouldn't worry too much, minister.
dio, my new iron man prototype, is ready for mass production.
mass production?
that's very impressive.
impressive indeed.
my replacements are already being trained.
l see.
but you, yourself, are relinquishing the role?
in fact, my armor is on display at home.
come and have a look if you'd like.
certainly, i'd love to visit.
good.
meanwhile, let's get down to business.
we have an arc station to build and there are a few pending issues... we had a very productive meeting, thank you very much.
my government and i wish you great success in your future endeavor.
which reminds me, may i ask you for one more small favor?
of course.
i'd like iron man dio's press conference to be really special.
special, huh?
dr. tanaka, what exactly is the reactor's status?
we're at 90% completion.
extraordinary.
i knew you people at lab 23 were good, but i didn't think you were this good.
of course we are, but we won't be fully operative until we have plutonium.
l wouldn't worry about that.
but i do worry, mr. stark.
i'm concerned about the japanese public's reaction to all of this.
if this project is successful, japan will have an unlimited supply of free energy.
rationally speaking, this will be a big plus for japan.
i'm afraid some people won't see things the same way you do.
if you hope to succeed here, perhaps you should try to understand how the japanese think.
okay then, why don't you teach me?
what must i do to make the japanese people fall in love with me?
a bit of humility certainly can't hurt.
humility isn't really my thing.
i'm not even sure what it means.
it seems as though your mind is somewhere else, tony.
hey pepper, i'm fine.
it's just that iron man and i have been through so much.
anyway, what's the news?
the iron man dio prototype is complete and the trainees have been sent to japan.
excellent.
how's life in the land of the rising sun?
you know, good food, beautiful women, what's not to like?
but the best thing of all, pepper, is that the arc station won't be used for military purposes.
great.
sounds like it's all coming together.
you know, we were right to start this project in japan.
right here, this is where my dreams will become a reality.
i just hope they appreciate it, tony.
me, too.
hey!
you call this a news story?
well, i call it trash!
trash!
do you really think so?
i'm starting to think your skills might be better applied to another line of work.
like finding a husband!
l totally volunteer!
you stay out of this, you idiot!
indeed, masuda would be a great candidate.
enough.
now, this is what real reporting looks like.
on a secret visit to japan what?
tony stark is here?
yeah, and i'm tired of getting the news from our competition, nanami!
get out of here and get on that story!
yes, sir!
some things are worth waiting for.
iron man dio.
mass production can begin as soon as it passes inspection, sir.
well, that's fine.
but i came to see you guys.
i'm glad to finally meet you all.
thank you, it's an honor to be chosen for this project.
you can count on us, sir.
glad to hear it.
all right then, let's test dio's performance.
sounds good, would you like to try?
no, this is your show.
i'll be up in the cheap seats.
he seems down-to-earth.
yeah, i agree.
he'd be better off giving us full authority on this project and retiring!
japan self-defense force test site, fuji
target acquired.
where was the impact?
checking target... what?
there's no damage!
incredible.
not a scratch.
as we say in my country, "you ain't seen nothing yet.
is it time for the flight test, mr. stark?
l have an idea.
minister, now would be the perfect time to fulfill that favor we spoke of the other day.
i think the japanese people will enjoy it.
we're ready, sir!
they won't be disappointed.
hey!
it's him!
mr. stark!
what's the purpose of your sudden visit to japan?
is it true that your arc station is just a front for the development of military weapons?
hello, japanese reporters.
it's a shame we couldn't meet at a better location.
can you tell us the true purpose behind the arc station?
sure.
the arc station will provide an unlimited supply of clean energy for free.
for free?
how is that possible?
yes, and there are no side effects of carbon dioxide emission.
is the military involved?
of course not!
listen, stark industries was once involved in the military industry.
but today, we are at the forefront of the global struggle for peace.
i don't believe it.
what's the catch?
is the japanese government involved?
mr. stark!
we'd also like to know more about you and iron man.
will you be putting on your armor here in japan?
unfortunately, the answer is no.
my days as iron man are over.
i'm retiring.
retiring?
are you kidding?
don't worry, you'll have an iron man, folks.
it just won't be me.
nanami, go on, ask him something!
yeah.
i'm so sorry!
well, hello.
glad to meet such a pretty reporter.
you jerk!
how dare you!
nanami...
hello, everyone.
it's nice to meet you japanese folks!
in cooperation with your very own self-defense force,
i'd like to put on a demonstration as a token of my appreciation for your great country.
so now, i'd like you all to just sit back, relax and let the show begin!
hey!
that's iron man!
a new iron man has appeared!
it's stark!
tony stark!
tony!
tony stark?
damn, what a show-off.
sure doesn't look like the cheap seats to me.
so much for having humility.
wow, he fell!
what was that weird flash of light?
hello?
are you all right?
aren't you...
i'm all right.
this is nothing.
but my cheek still hurts!
yeah, i'm sorry about that.
mr. stark!
are you all right?
i'm fine, doc.
l can't say the same for dio, though.
i'll leave it here for your team to pick up.
we're on our way.
i'll meet you back at the station.
roger that.
l was just wondering if i could ask you for a favor?
i guess so.
would you mind giving me a ride home?
sure, no problem.
in return, will you give me an exclusive interview?
i'm nanami ota from the tokyo journal.
where do i start?
come on, nanami, think, think!
you know, most reporters ask at least one question.
darn it!
tell me, are you or are you not retiring?
that was it.
today was the last time you'll ever see me wearing the iron man suit.
at least, until the next time.
what was that?
i missed that.
nothing.
while we're at it, do you mind if i ask you a question?
tell me the truth. what do the japanese people really think of me?
they admire you, but you're a puzzle to them.
they don't quite know what to make of you.
they think you might have some kind of hidden agenda.
that's nonsense.
i'm an honest and trustworthy guy.
anyway, what do you look for in a woman?
there are no specific traits.
i'm not biased.
what do you look for in a man?
well, someone who is sincere, but has a good sense of humor.
are you describing your boyfriend?
no, i don't have one.
you cannot be serious.
what's wrong with all the men in japan?
don't get me started with japanese men!
wait a minute!
i'm the one doing this interview, got it?
of course you are.
carry on.
there are so many questions that i could ask him, but i can't think of any.
let me help you.
i'll tell you my secret.
what's your secret?
how i kiss ladies... l was kidding.
gotta go!
before you take another swing at me.
what?
hey!
you still owe me an interview!
l thought there might have been a bug in the al code, but that's not it.
what caused the flash of light that i saw?
mr. stark.
i'm having the trainee team run a full diagnostic of dio's armor.
thank you, doctor.
is everything okay over there?
okay, we're ready.
ready.
as far as i can see, everything seems to be working fine.
maybe it's just too much machine for the old man.
hey, what is it?
what's the matter?
hang on!
we'll get you out of there!
what do you think is going on, exactly?
you okay in there?
hey!
who are you?
no!
stop!
what are you doing?
what's going on?
what just happened?
dr. tanaka!
i'm not sure.
all i can tell you is that the prototype just attacked two of the trainees!
so that's it!
we've been hacked!
what?
hacked?
i don't know how they did it.
but it seems as though somebody has hacked into the suit and reprogrammed it.
reprogrammed it?
yes, reprogrammed dio.
someone must have taken over dio.
that strange flash of light...
it all started with the malfunction.
mr. stark!
it appears the dio is headed outside.
dr. tanaka!
put the whole place on lockdown!
understood.
right away.
lockdown blocks five and six!
it's no use.
it's approaching block seven!
slow it down!
i'm on my way!
shutting down blocks seven and eight!
this is a level one emergency!
well, my old friend.
it looks like you and i have one last rodeo.
there you are.
not bad.
only iron man can stop iron man.
l hope i didn't hurt him.
hey, buddy, are you all right?
what the... what the hell are you?
you ugly... l am scorpio, a member of the zodiac.
zodiac?
now prepare to die.
this is only the beginning.
i think i need to postpone my retirement.
what?
the dio armor.
it's gone.
what just happened?
l really blew it!
this was my chance to get an exclusive interview and i blanked out.
what should i do?
the boss is going to throw another hissy fit.
what?
tony stark was summoned to appear before parliament for questioning over allegations of illegal smuggling of plutonium into japan.
this could be a real scoop!
next on iron man:
going nuclear.
wait for me, tony stark!
next episode:
#2:
going nuclear
__file_terminal__
is everything all right?
smooth as silk. we're right on schedule.
#2:
going nuclear
tony stark.
a brilliant visionary and the ceo of a multi-billion dollar corporation
that he inherited from his father.
in his spare time, he is also iron man, the superhero.
and i thought he was just some airhead playboy with too much money.
in other news,
tony stark, on a visit to japan, has been summoned to appear before parliament.
stark will have to respond to allegations of illegal smuggling of plutonium into japan.
mr. masuda!
grab your camera.
let's go!
i'm full...
that's absurd.
why would we stop developing the station?
l never told anyone to stop.
we received information.
there was an incident.
plutonium was stolen and smuggled into japan.
what does that have to do with the station?
the arc station runs on plutonium.
well, it seems pretty obvious that someone is trying to set me up.
l trust you, of course.
but the situation is weird, to say the least.
the problem will be solved if i retrieve the missing plutonium, right?
that won't be necessary.
our team is already handling it.
besides, i think you already have enough on your plate, mr. stark.
all right, then.
mr. stark, according to these allegations, you are attempting to smuggle nuclear fuel into japan.
is this true?
what is your answer to this question?
what's wrong with you?
l have an answer.
i'm just trying to come up with the proper japanese phrase.
i think i've got it.
these are false accusations.
mr. stark!
your comment is insufficient.
will you be releasing a statement?
can you give us details about your discussion with minister kuroda?
mr. stark!
thanks a lot, mr. masuda!
we're late!
we missed everything!
mr. stark!
perfect timing.
do you mind giving me a lift?
sure.
mr. stark!
please wait!
just one more question, sir!
l can't believe my luck!
here's my chance to get that interview.
thanks, you saved me from the noisy press.
can i thank you by taking you out to lunch?
somewhere we can have a nice glass of wine?
thanks, but i'd prefer an interview.
and a few photos maybe?
pretty please?
sorry, my bad.
did i just ask you out for dinner right in front of your boyfriend?
hey, look, no problem.
you can come too.
he's your boyfriend, right?
of course not!
he's just a photographer i work with!
a simple, "no" would have sufficed.
now, mr. stark.
most of japan thinks you're trying to smuggle plutonium.
are the rumors true or not?
due to allegations, stark industries' stock is dropping.
if they are just rumors, why don't you explain at once?
l could tell your side of the story.
l believe that this will help you, as well.
i see.
you became a real reporter.
thank you very much.
the new me is going...
but, i'm beginning to miss the old you already.
what?
did i upset tony stark?
no!
thanks for the ride.
waiting is not my thing.
he's gone.
well, that's just great.
my last chance with tony stark and i blew it.
nanami...
maritime sdf 1, here.
we've finished investigating the target cargo.
there is nothing strange to report.
roger that.
that one.
no one is here.
hey!
are you okay?
what happened here?
it was some kind of creature.
we couldn't escape it!
the plutonium...
you have to hurry!
switching from infrared sensors to radiation detection.
well, now we know the plutonium was here.
you have got to be kidding me!
l am cancer, member of the zodiac.
the zodiac?
sorry, but i'm in a hurry.
you'll have to excuse me.
connect me with minister kuroda.
minister, there is a problem with the cargo ship.
what are you talking about?
your investigative team has been wiped out.
wiped out?
sir, are you familiar with the zodiac?
it's a terrorist organization, an affiliate of advanced ldea mechanics.
they are the ones behind whatever is going on here.
they are trying to bring the plutonium in.
really?
that sounds a bit far-fetched.
stay out of this, mr. stark.
we didn't ask for your assistance.
frankly, this is starting to make me think that you have something to hide.
really?
well, i guess i'm going to have to prove you wrong, then.
and the only way to do that is to find the plutonium myself and get it back safely.
i will assist you as much as i can then.
please set up the checkpoints.
okay.
it seems i am a little late.
access surveillance videos.
yeah, that's it.
now play back the tape.
stop.
bingo.
all right, access stark industries, satellite 004.
okay, lock and track the target.
give me 3-d traffic mode.
now, continue tracking.
continuously transfer the data to iron man.
roger that.
hey nanami, will you try interviewing tony stark again?
yeah, i'll never give up.
l can't leave him like this.
you were quick to snap out of it.
what is it?
tony stark just drove by.
what?
why didn't you say something?
don't you think you're driving a little fast?
l won't let him go.
i'm going to get that interview, even if i die trying.
i'm not enjoying this!
i'm borrowing your camera, okay?
what?
nanami, wait!
mind if i borrow your scooter?
hey!
don't worry!
i'll bring it right back!
minister kuroda, l found the plutonium thief.
i'm tracking him now.
really?
we will continue until checkpoint.
what's going on?
why all the traffic?
well, do something. we can't just sit here.
go around.
get us out of here!
there's no way around.
this way is just as bad.
gotcha.
we've got someone on our tail!
what?
we're almost at the rendezvous!
so you're gonna play hard to get, aren't you?
smoke bombs.
if they hit you, there'll be damage.
did he intentionally target our car?
he's just playing with us.
damn, a checkpoint.
come on!
l found him.
gangway!
i will not miss my next shot.
he's right behind us!
ouch... what is this?
hand me the suitcase.
nice and easy.
enough!
cease and desist before more innocent people get hurt.
and you are?
let's just say i'm a concerned citizen.
we can still make it to the rendezvous.
let's go!
right!
where's the camera?
i've got to get a shot of this!
listen, concerned citizen, would you mind getting out of my way?
i'm warning you.
do you realize how many laws you've just broken?
sorry about that.
listen pal, you are standing between me and something much biggerthan you.
no need to apologize.
you americans think you can just come here and do whatever...
excuse me?
sorry to interrupt.
we didn't finish our interview, mr. stark.
well, she is persistent.
what is that thing?
what is that?
find shelter, now!
now it gets interesting.
her suitcase!
i'm getting radioactive readings!
damn it.
it's that girl!
she must have it!
why are you following me?
this is so not fair!
where's iron man when you need him?
nice stealth technology.
no readings.
no footprint.
this is nagato sakurai.
due to the incident, please allow temporary exemptions to traffic laws.
roger that.
what is he going to do?
l see, over there!
what's happening?
surrender the plutonium!
stop it!
sorry, but you're not gonna faint on me, are you?
i'd hate to drop you.
we recovered the plutonium, zodiac.
plutonium?
huh?
the false rumors and allegations were cleared, thus proving his innocence,
iron man,
tony stark himself.
perhaps the japanese public will learn a lesson from all of this.
as victims of discrimination, we should not be quick to judge others.
hi, nanami.
mr. masuda, i'm sorry about your camera.
i will replace it when i get my next paycheck.
no, that's not it.
look what came for you.
they're gorgeous!
who could they be from?
looking forward to our third date.
tony stark.
yeah, i guess he's thanking you for writing such a flattering article.
you think so?
i've read your report.
tell me, what did you think of tony stark?
he's reckless, sir.
however, he's a man of action.
strong willed.
a man who will achieve his goals.
in any case, he is interesting.
yes, i see.
i'll keep that in mind.
l hope this will change people's impression of tony stark.
he saved the day.
i'm going to strive to be an expert like him.
what is that?
an enormous tornado?
the number of victims is increasing.
l have to look into this.
chief!
next on iron man:
reap the whirlwind.
l still have to pay for mr. masuda's camera!
next episode:
#3:
reap the whirlwind
__file_terminal__
what?
where'd all this wind... #3:
reap the whirlwind
this is the arc station's new security system, an emp device.
looks rather underdeveloped.
form is secondary to function.
this emp generator can send out an electromagnetic pulse that's capable of overloading any targeting device, frying its circuits and disabling it.
very well.
breaking into this place ought to be even more difficult now.
as difficult as getting you to smile.
let's continue, shall we?
we're still conducting trial phases, so it's a bit limited.
but we can increase its power as we develop it.
l hope so.
hello?
dr. tanaka?
thank god, you're safe!
professor yamaguchi?
it's been a while.
is everything all right?
no, i think my life is in danger.
they already got professor ohno!
if you're not careful...
professor?
professor yamaguchi!
professor yamaguchi, can you hear me?
what happened?
professor!
nanami!
there are better things to do than to read the competition's magazine!
and you're not being paid to sit around and eat!
ouch, ouch, ouch.
actually, chief, you may want to have a look at this.
why?
what is it?
meteorologist, satoshi yamaguchi, killed by tornado while driving...
and i care because?
because only a day earlier, a college professor was also killed by a tornado.
don't you think there's some sort of connection between the two?
control tower, requesting permission to land.
over.
roger that.
you're clear for landing.
what the...
earthquake?
look!
that can't be!
a tornado!
an f4, maybe even an f5!
we've never seen a tornado that size in japan before!
it'll be here any second!
do we evacuate?
no!
it's too late!
this can't be happening.
look at that!
iron man?
lnitiate thermal sensors.
l knew this wasn't just a tornado.
i prefer traveling in a limo.
what the hell...
damn.
the zodiac again.
interesting.
professor sakamoto.
long time no see.
may l?
of course, dr. tanaka.
l trust you are doing well?
yes, thank you.
checkmate.
what?
wait a minute.
may i ask who this is?
this young lady's a reporter.
her name is...
nanami ota.
l dropped by to get the professor's opinion on a string of recent tornadoes.
l thought it would be good to get an expert's opinion.
right.
excellent timing.
you can ask dr. tanaka here.
she was a brilliant meteorology student.
that was years ago.
i'm sorry, not to be rude, but who are you?
dr. chika tanaka.
i work for lab 23.
lab 23?
really?
that's the research and development lab associated with stark industries, isn't it?
do you know tony stark personally?
l work with him, but i wouldn't say i know him.
got something for ya!
it's not working.
you monster!
so how about it?
can i get your take on these tornadoes?
and anything you can share about mr. stark would, of course, be amazing.
which tabloid are you with?
i'm with the tokyo journal.
is that so?
what do you think, professor sakamoto, about the puzzling deaths of both professor ohno and professor yamaguchi?
it's as if both were sucked into tornadoes or something of the like.
l know what you're implying.
that there may be ties to our old research program, the tesla project.
am i right, dr. tanaka?
wait, what's the tesla project?
it was a research initiative in weather manipulation.
we were exploring methods to control natural disasters like typhoons.
it was groundbreaking work.
we gathered a team of field experts and worked around the clock.
but the project was frozen before we could perfect things.
but why?
it could have done so much good.
japan is run by idiots, that's why.
there was no warning.
they were too short-sighted to see how revolutionary our findings truly were.
in light of these recent tornadoes,
i'd say the tesla project isn't as dead as we thought.
absurd.
every scrap of research data was sealed away.
what's happening?
professor sakamoto!
professor!
call an ambulance.
quick!
okay!
take care of my armor.
damn it.
your injury doesn't look serious.
and you are?
you need to get out of our way if you can move.
we're trying to tend to the injured.
hey. wait a second.
look, is there anything i can do to help?
there's nothing you can do here.
why don't you go home and lie on that plush bed of yours?
come over here.
give me a hand.
hey, where's the crane i asked for?
road conditions are pretty bad.
it's going to take a little longer.
damn it.
i don't know how much longer we can wait.
it's dangerous here.
please stand back!
let me through.
i'm telling you i can help here.
l can't allow that, sir.
now, step back!
what's going on?
look, i don't have my armor with me but i'm offering you whatever help you need.
this has nothing to do with you.
get out of here!
l get it, you don't like me.
but now is not the time to let your emotions control you.
if you need more equipment, l can get it for you!
you're a devil's advocate who became rich by trading weapons.
i don't need help from a man like you.
that was years ago.
in any case, civilians are not allowed to enter.
now get lost!
excuse me!
i just received report that a massive tornado hit a u.s. military base.
isn't that also connected to your research?
l want to hear more details.
oh, man!
what?
not so fast!
you were a little overthe speed limit there.
how persistent.
l may still be a newbie, but i'm pretty tenacious.
hurry up!
pull it towards us!
good!
hold it right there!
okay!
ease off!
this is the last warning.
you're in the way.
now get out!
but you're not my boss.
what?
damn it!
we need that equipment!
where is it?
the road is still blocked with debris.
they'll be held up for a while!
no!
it's going under!
get a rope!
hurry up, before it's too late!
idiot!
he's up!
get a line and a life preserver right away!
hang in there.
that's strange.
someone opened the encrypted files.
only research members have access to those files.
where did they log in from?
so what exactly are we looking at here?
l mean, i have no clue what's happening.
are you gonna say anything?
hello?
what's the tesla project you were talking about before?
please answer!
we combined nikola tesla's electromagnetic dynamics with the butterfly theory, assimilated it and applied meteorology to it, in an attempt to turn the whole world into a massive electromagnetic device.
miss ota, right?
let me tell you something.
i don't like people like you.
hurtful.
this email extension...
it's from professor sakamoto's university!
the person who hacked this file...
did you find something?
professor!
professor. what the hell are you... l finally found an organization that understands and appreciates my work.
l gave them everything i've got, and with pleasure.
so the tornado at the military base... l know.
breathtaking, wasn't it?
l was finally able to prove our hypothesis.
it has all come to fruition.
what's wrong with you?
don't you care about people's lives?
you whack job!
wake up, professor.
they tried to kill you because you were no longer needed.
so what?
as long as my work survives, nothing else matters.
look out!
you're not getting in my way!
now's our chance.
come on!
okay.
how about that?
not too shabby for someone like me.
point taken.
you were also right on the money about the professor.
about him being a whack job?
yes, that.
he's crazy, but nonetheless correct.
he did it!
are they both all right?
good job!
here!
grab this!
hooray!
almost there!
hang on!
has my armor been repaired?
yes.
and i have something i'd like to show you.
what's this?
an improved version of our emp device.
an emp cannon.
you fire this thing at the target and you'll shut it down.
this underdeveloped device?
are you sure it'll work?
there's one possible problem.
your armor could be affected too.
it'll be okay once the emp protection is in place.
l need a little more time.
what's wrong?
a massive tornado has appeared right by the yokosuka base.
round two.
yokohama city fire department
it's iron man!
it's dangerous!
you have to evacuate!
how spectacular.
idiot!
come back!
you can't fool me twice.
i'll shut you down.
mr. stark!
try to reboot the system!
mr. stark!
damn it!
what's happening?
what's wrong, iron man?
can i make it?
stark...
he really is a piece of work.
thank you, dr. tanaka.
form is indeed secondary to function.
right.
you can't judge a book by its cover.
maybe using such nasty words wasn't a good idea.
well, chika seemed to like it.
i've gone off topic.
mr. masuda, our next story is about mr. kawashima, right?
a car racer recovering from a race accident.
so let's go!
next on iron man:
a twist of memory, a t urn of mind.
what?
who is that with tony stark?
who is it?
next episode:
#4:
a t wist of memory, a t urn of mind
__file_terminal__
on the day iron man was born, l lost a friend of mine.
#4:
a twist of memory, a turn of mind what makes an excellent weapon?
one with a high-striking power and a versatility to be effective in any battlefield.
what i have here is, as it were, a mechanical raptor that can dominate both the sea and the air.
dominate both?
l give you
stark industries' next generation fighter jet, the screamer!
pepper, we hooked a big one.
never doubted it for a second.
congratulations for your success.
thanks.
listen, i'm going straight to the next presentation.
l want you to touch base with them.
roger that.
this guy's tony stark!
dead?
no.
he's alive.
good.
bring him back to camp.
how much?
how much do you want?
you guys are gonna ransom me, right?
what's your price for my safe return?
l have some bad news and bad news, mr. stark.
first, you need medical help or you will die.
not something i wanted to hear.
second, it's not money i want.
then what do you want from me?
l want weapons.
biological weapons, chemicals, everything.
you give them to me.
i'll spare your life.
isn't that what you do, build killing machines?
i guess i don't have much choice in the matter.
good, we have a deal then.
yinsen!
see to his wounds.
death merchant.
it'd be far better if you just died.
it has been five years...
after a crash like that, you look unbelievably great, mr. kawashima.
yeah, too bad, huh?
it'd make a better story if i was dead.
no, a dead guy doesn't make for a very good interview.
i'll be fine and back on the track before you know it.
i'll get an exclusive when you make your comeback.
sure thing.
you'll be the first.
that's great, right, mr. masuda?
who said you can have his fruit?
i'm sorry!
that's a beautiful dress, doctor.
you look truly stunning.
of course, i'm not saying you wouldn't look stunning without the dress.
do you mind if i ask you a question, mr. stark?
why get into race cars?
well, you know, thrills, speed, plus money for charity to boot.
which, of course, helps to improve the corporate image of stark industries.
you can be so cynical.
our corporate image here is still merchants of death profiting from building weapons.
you want to win the hearts and minds of the japanese public?
exactly.
i want to show them there's a human side to this company.
and sponsoring events like this helps do that.
and, of course, personally, i like fast cars.
so, it serves a dual purpose.
transforming your company from a top weapons manufacturer to a promoter of world peace.
quite a turnaround. what made you do it?
are we playing a game of 20 questions?
so in other words, you won't answer.
five years ago, l was held prisoner by a group of terrorists.
and i met a man who changed my life forever.
what the hell are they thinking, making me build a weapon out of this junk?
so, you're really going to give these thugs what they want?
thugs?
aren't you one of them, too?
i'm their prisoner just as much as you are.
i'm useful, so they let me live.
so we're in the same boat.
if it means staying alive, then yes, i'm gonna give them what they want.
even knowing that what you give them will help them commit genocide?
look, all i want to do is stay alive.
wake up!
haven't you ever wondered how many people were killed with the weapons you made?
if that's the way you feel, then why the hell did you save my life?
l didn't save your life.
l only postponed your death.
what's that supposed to mean?
you only have a week left to live.
a week?
that's how long you can expect the battery in that pacemaker to last.
not a lot of time, but enough for you to regret all you've done.
as i felt death slowly approaching, l realized that i had spent my whole adult life creating ways to kill people, nothing more.
so i made a vow to myself that if i survived, l would devote my life to undoing the damage i'd done.
the chance of your comeback is next to nil.
l know how it feels when your dreams have been taken from you.
who the hell are you?
someone who can help you get back on the racetrack.
great.
runs like a charm.
l can't wait to show it to the public.
are you going to drive it yourself then?
nanami. what brings you here?
the interview.
that's right.
should we get started?
well, actually,
i'm here to interview the driver.
who would've ever thought he'd make a miraculous comeback?
seriously?
you can get me back on the track?
of course, there's something we ask in return.
what is it?
name it!
i'll do anything if i can race one more time!
it's very simple.
mr. kawashima!
you all right, stark?
is that you, logan?
it's been a while, huh?
what are you doing in japan?
i've got unfinished business.
no way!
what the hell is going on?
you'd spend your last precious hours of life building weapons to kill others.
you're either a fool or you're mad.
it's done.
what is it?
i'm gonna need your help.
can you put this in my chest?
so that's what you've been working on, a new pacemaker.
exactly.
if it works, it should keep my heart going for at least 100 years.
that's a bit of overkill, don't you think?
it'll power a lot more than my heart.
l want no part of it.
if you ask me, you've lived far too long already.
if you help me, i can get us both out of here.
how do you plan to do that?
this armor.
the arc reactor i just made will generate enough power to run it.
so, what do you say?
l say that whether you live or die will be decided by a flip of a coin.
a coin?
this coin once deflected a dagger, just enough to save my life.
so, you see, this is no ordinary coin.
the first thing i'm gonna do when i get outta here is take a hot shower and have a glass of chilled champagne.
if those are really your first wishes, l wasted my time saving your life.
the coin has spoken.
it can't be a mistake.
destiny!
that's what it is!
destiny...
do you really think it's destiny's way to give a second chance at life to a fool who has yet to realize his true calling?
you don't like me much, do you?
this was a beautiful and peaceful country.
but the likes of you showed up and destroyed everything.
what happened?
men blinded by greed.
they spread hatred and weapons.
they brought years of civil war to this land.
they cost me my family.
i'm sorry.
spare me your pity.
just get back to work.
zodiac's been turning people into living weapons?
they're transforming those with high physical ability to weapons and using them to assassinate vlps.
the one who attacked you must be one of them.
is that why you're here in japan?
lnvestigating zodiac?
no.
i was chasing a when i came upon this case.
l want you to leave this case to me.
what's on it?
intel i've dug up on your friend.
you'll find out where he is, too.
l owe you one.
usually, i love it when ladies chase me.
but i'm a little busy today.
can we reschedule?
l know you're looking for kawashima.
take me with you.
no can do.
you saw what he did.
he's dangerous.
but...
he's right!
get out of here before you get hurt.
my business is only with tony stark.
what's come over you?
your dream was to win a race and stand on the podium.
that's right.
the only way that dream comes true is by killing him.
you can't be serious.
i've got it from here.
gentlemen, start your engines!
damn it!
wake up!
zodiac is using you!
shut your mouth!
no!
the machine's taking him over!
fire!
mr.
kawashima!
he's still alive.
we can save him if we get him to lab 23.
what's this?
as quickly as you can.
got it.
leave it to me!
dio's headed this way.
you want me to stick around?
no, this is my problem.
i'll take care of it.
here we go.
oh, no!
good.
now divert power from the arc reactor into the armor.
quickly.
it's started.
what's going on?
what are you trying to do?
you!
answer me!
yinsen!
i'm all right.
but any moment now, there will be more guards pouring in here!
we need more time.
i'll delay them!
come back!
yinsen, don't!
come on, hurry up!
and to think, l was merciful enough to let you live.
die!
yinsen!
hang on. we're getting out of here.
this is as far as i go.
you'll have to finish the journey without me.
don't talk like that, don't you give up!
l understand now why the armor had to be made.
the world needs you.
take it, it belongs to you now.
use your wealth and your knowledge to finish what we started.
promise me.
how can you control dio like that?
who the hell are you?
impossible!
you...
yinsen.
i'm so glad that mr. kawashima is getting better.
thanks to lab 23's technology, the rehab for his comeback is going well, too.
what?
people are falling to the ground?
cause unknown?
and the arc station is the source of infection?
next on iron man:
outbreak.
save those people, iron man!
next episode:
#5:
outbreak
__file_terminal__
the anti-icing solvent, it's working!
but booster power output is unstable.
what's next?
radiation shields operational capacity exceeded.
great.
any more good news?
continuation not recommended.
abort ascent immediately.
oh, ye of little faith.
oh, come on!
#5:
outbreak
i need a 30 % boost in the lrs's power to really make it sing.
affirmative.
next issue is the radiation shields.
i'd like to find a way to...
hi, tony.
pepper, i need you to run a background check on someone right away.
it needs to be as detailed as possible.
sure.
what's her name?
sorry to burst your bubble, but this time she is a he...
get me everything you can on dr. ho yinsen.
dr. yinsen?
tony, are you serious?
the same yinsen who was with you in the cave?
i've got another call, pepper.
just take care of it for me, okay?
okay.
what's up, doc?
it appears we have a problem, mr. stark.
i'd appreciate it if you'd meet me at the control tower's medical center asap .
the medical center?
so tell me, nanami, is what you said earlier true?
is what true?
we talked about a lot of stuff.
what you told the chief.
that you have a meeting with stark?
l never said that exactly!
l knew it!
you're barking more like a real news hound every day.
instead of concentrating on me, could you be more careful with your junk food?
you're trashing my car!
masuda!
didn't you just hear what i said?
that poor girl!
he's an arc station worker who lives nearby.
his body's breaking down because his immune system is failing.
he's in a state of toxic shock.
if we don't get him stabilized soon, he'll die.
the cause?
we're still waiting for additional test results to come back from the lab... we think it's a virus attacking his white blood cells.
we have to find the source of the virus so that we can stop it and cure it.
let's keep this under wraps for now, okay?
understood. we're on our way.
bad news.
another victim is being brought to the lab.
hello?
tony!
nanami!
what are you doing here?
you had me convinced there was nothing to worry about with stark.
now, i'm not so sure.
something's just not right, is it?
definitely not. we need to snoop around.
try to get an angle on this.
we should try... lchiro, you are so disgusting, l told you not to spill anything!
captain sakurai, good to see you, sir.
we have a problem.
sat 3, one of our recon satellites, stopped transmitting telemetry data several days ago.
it won't accept any of our data inputs.
run a system analysis.
we ran a thorough diagnostic, sir.
we didn't detect any software or anomalies.
sat 1 is configured and ready to transmit.
we've repositioned sat 1 for a sat 3 visual.
we're online, sir.
get us closer.
maximize the image.
what's going on?
another malfunction?
negative, sir.
all systems are working, but the camera has been damaged.
damaged?
so, it's not a virus?
right. we know it's not a virus, bacteria or a chemical substance.
we can't find a single thing that would cause such cellular disruption.
are you kidding me?
with all that we know, we can't find a cure?
there has got to be an answer.
what is it?
mr. stark, answer me... what exactly is going on?
do you know what's going on?
it's total chaos!
this sickness!
it's becoming an epidemic!
it's spreading!
what did you say?
the er's are overloaded!
more people are being infected every hour!
hello?
are you listening to me, mr. stark?
hello?
say something.
who the hell invited you here?
we have orders.
we're here to lock down the arc station.
what are you talking about?
the arc station is suspected to be ground zero for the spread of the virus.
hold on!
we have proof that a virus is not the cause of this!
ma'am, please.
the ministry of health and minister kuroda have officially put us in charge of this facility.
nobody is going anywhere.
except for you!
you need to calm down.
you'll only dig yourself into a deeper hole.
there's no point in this.
we won't change their minds now.
let me try a more diplomatic approach.
i'll contact minister kuroda.
our surveillance satellite?
yes sir. we no longer have control of sat 1 and its location is unknown.
obviously, this is a matter of national security and must be dealt with at once.
we need to send a craft up to inspect it.
we don't have a plan in place right now.
preparing a mission to space could take several months and we need this done immediately.
it is quite the dilemma.
any thoughts, captain?
l do have one idea.
still haven't been able to reach him, huh?
i've called him and sent him emails as well.
then it's time for me to go and see him in person.
impossible.
oh, it's possible if you could fake being sick for a minute... what?
during the commotion, we'll slip out of here.
please don't try anything stupid!
it's probably a little late for that.
well, since you're not going to help me out, here goes nothing.
but...
hold it right there!
stop!
captain nagato sakurai.
sdf covert operations.
oh, captain!
pardon me, sir!
i'm here to speak with mr. stark.
minister kuroda sent me.
certainly, sir!
so, we meet again.
why am i not surprised that you're part of the self-defense force?
mr. stark.
i have a favorto ask you.
well, what a coincidence, l could use a favor from you.
l want this persecution of my company to stop.
an sdf surveillance satellite has gone offline.
this could have dire consequences.
then we're in the same boat.
l have only one concern.
and that isjapan's future.
but i realize i can't accomplish this mission alone.
i'm going to need your help, iron man.
isn't that a little selfish?
mr. stark.
enough. we need to work together now.
here is a visual of sat 1 when it began malfunctioning last week.
now bring up the archive file footage from six months ago.
zoom in on the top.
this is now and this is the image from six months ago.
what the hell is that thing?
that is what destroyed the camera on sat 3.
what is the altitude of that thing?
it's in the thermosphere. 200 kilometers up.
doc, i need you to run a simulation.
simulate a beam from its solar panels down to earth.
right.
the arc station!
we're in its path!
maybe it's time that iron man and the sdf work together and fix this.
agreed.
does the sdf have a jet capable of reaching such an altitude?
a jet with boosters powerful enough to break through the atmosphere?
we have one, but it's only a prototype.
have it flight-ready in six hours.
and i'm gonna need the best pilot you have.
your help is appreciated, mr. stark.
yeah, well i have this bad habit called caring.
good for us.
i'll get that jet prepped right away.
what changed your mind?
why are you doing this?
it's a chance to solve our little medical emergency.
zodiac is using that satellite.
they're using it to beam that illness down to earth at an undetectable frequency.
using a radiation beam at an undetectable frequency?
exactly, zodiac is targeting the arc station.
but our shields are too strong.
so, while a small amount gets through, most of it ends up irradiating the area.
can that really be what's causing all this?
that's it.
if we want to prevent further casualties, we have to get up there and take that sucker out as soon as possible.
what is the cause of this virus?
please vacate the premises.
admittance is strictly prohibited.
is it the arc station?
give us a statement now!
you have a responsibility!
l insist that you let me in!
l have an appointment with mr. stark.
please check your list!
hey, what's going on?
no!
nanami!
you're infected!
l didn't know your iron man armor was equipped to go into space.
my suit's pressurization, temperature regulation, and oxygen supply are all good to go.
but there's still one issue i need to resolve.
and that is...
no biggie really.
just haven't quite perfected the particle radiation shields.
oh, no.
you'll kill yourself!
going into space without radiation shields is suicide!
we don't really have a choice, do we?
but!
nanami!
like i said, we don't really have a choice.
mr. stark, wait.
i think i can help you.
i'm developing a protective coating for fujikawa aerospace.
it's designed to shield space shuttles from radiation.
if you were to apply the coating, it should protect you from cosmic rays.
i'll take two coats to go!
we haven't actually performed final tests yet...
tests?
who needs 'em?
if you invented it, i'm sure it'll perform flawlessly.
mr. stark.
i'm currently programming the vector and coordinates for your space flight.
i'll handle it.
there's too large a variance in conditions.
okay. we'll be tracking you the whole time.
i'm counting on you.
this'll be sweet.
we're in contact with your jet.
it's already airborne.
great.
nice job.
tell the pilot i'm heading up.
here we go.
there's my ride.
all right, let's start climbing.
mr. stark.
tell me this is a joke.
you did ask for the best pilot in japan.
well, you got him.
all right then.
let's see what you're made of, captain.
iron man has docked with the sdf jet.
all right, captain, climb to an altitude of 50,000 meters.
roger.
approaching 15 ,000... 20,000...
captain, your engine output appears to be dropping.
roger that.
still climbing.
i can handle it.
captain, sir, your jet won't hold together much longer.
let me know when it starts getting bumpy.
be careful what you ask for.
hold on tight!
captain, you're running too hot!
too hot!
he's pushing it way too hard, they're gonna burn up!
sir, abort!
i've almost got him up there!
iron man, prepare to detach in 5,000 meters!
detachment in 4,000... 3,000... 2,000... 1,000!
altitude achieved.
mr. stark, stand by to undock.
it's all up to you now!
thanks for the lift, captain.
i owe you one.
catch you on the flipside!
charge!
iron man's rockets fired successfully.
he's continuing his climb.
boosters have jettisoned.
second stage rockets have ignited.
he's at 150.
status report.
how is the iron man armor holding up?
nothing to worry about!
your radiation coating is working perfectly!
altitude, 200 kilometers.
i've really done it.
i'm in space.
mr. stark!
well done.
you should have visual on sat 1 .
can you confirm?
l see it.
that thing's attached like a leech.
i'm gonna move in for a closer look.
what's wrong?
mr. stark, come in please!
it's nothing.
i'm good.
just the anti-gravity system...
it needs some improvement.
where the hell is it?
it disappeared.
communication has been cut off.
okay!
what have we here?
this is where the energy waves are originating from!
mr. stark!
sending data now.
quickly!
it's data on the energy beam.
analyze its composition.
data received!
send the data to lab 23.
i've worn out my welcome!
my turn now!
hey, you guys haven't started writing my eulogy yet, have you?
news flash.
one parasite vaporized.
mr. stark?
i've got good news for you, too.
what's that?
we counteracted the effects of the radiation.
we expect everyone to make a full recovery, including nanami.
that is great news. what a relief.
yes, it is.
now come home safely.
the view from up here is out of this world.
but, i've got some unfinished business.
for a while, i wondered what might happen to me.
but thanks to iron man, l narrowly escaped death.
and he learned to fly way up in space!
huh?
what?
the arc station will be attacked by cyber-terrorism next, you say?
how do you stop something like that?
next time on iron man:
technical difficulties.
hey!
iron man!
what do we do?
next episode:
#6:
technical difficulties
__file_terminal__
iron ma
mom.
mom!
#6:
technical difficulties
rough night, huh?
you look like you've been put through the ringer.
so is it from working too hard?
or is it from all the partying?
even play can be hard work, pep.
so tell me, have you dug up any new info on dr. yinsen?
i've done a lot of investigating and i can tell you that the chances of him still being alive are pretty slim.
come on.
that's not news.
l could've told you that.
the problem with what you're saying is that l saw him myself.
and i think he partnered up with those zodiac freaks.
what the hell could've happened to make him want to turn to them?
i'm gonna need help finding the answer.
do you think he could have somehow been brainwashed by zodiac?
no, that man has the strongest will power i've ever seen.
he never gives up.
he'd die before someone could reprogram him.
i think you may be right.
after what happened last week in japan, a witness reported seeing someone who looked very similar to yinsen.
but the city was too chaotic, there's no way of proving it was really him.
interesting.
keep looking into that, pepper.
l have to ask.
what do you plan to do if you find out he's alive?
l wouldn't be here if it weren't for him.
if yinsen is alive,
i've got a feeling that he deeply needs me and my powers.
and i have to help him this time.
and if he... what's going on?
what's wrong with the monitoring system?
it seems to be indicating that there's a fire in every room.
no, i haven't received a report of there being a fire in the building.
according to what i'm seeing here, it has to be a system malfunction.
that was really weird.
what now?
what's happening?
so you're rebelling against me!
i can relate!
it's not my fault you were programmed to be a boring cleaning bot.
but i'm shutting you down now!
denied?
that's impossible.
l built this system.
sometimes you have to get your hands dirty when you're fighting a hostile takeover.
thanks for helping me.
why would these bots start attacking us?
that's a good question.
i'd say we can definitely rule out any kind of programming error.
great.
this is just what we need.
access the ac system.
what the hell is going on?
it won't accept my commands.
if it gets any colder, things are gonna get bad real quick.
l agree!
we need to evacuate now!
i've found the cause.
it's a virus!
our operating system has been attacked somehow.
are you saying that the arc station's security system has been hacked?
the virus seems to be targeting the reactor's main system.
what?
hey, mom, i wanna go play in the snow, too.
i'm really sorry, sho.
but you know you can't go out in this weather, honey.
it's just too cold out there.
you don't wanna get sick again, do you?
mommy only wants what's best for you.
you know that, right?
mommy's trying to help the computer.
she wants to prevent it from catching the virus.
the same way i help you.
we have to prevent you from getting sick.
do you understand that?
yeah.
why don't you come over here so that i can show you something?
what's that?
it's a fish.
but you gave it wings.
so that it can swim and fly.
pretty neat, isn't it?
the vaccine is ready.
great.
well, thanks to a heuristic algorithm, i'll give that little worm its walking papers.
now preparing to execute.
thanks, anti-virus program.
looks like it worked.
time for a nice hot shower.
okay, so that didn't work.
guess my shower's gonna have to wait.
nothing's working on my end either, l can't stop it.
come on!
no luck?
looks like we'll have to pull out the big guns, then.
good idea.
are you creating additional barriers to block access to the reactor?
precisely.
i'm building a firewall.
by installing a firewall around the reactor, i'll be closing it off, isolating the arc's core.
i've informed the mainframe of the virus infection.
the first firewall was a success!
good.
now, l'li just repeat the process and add another firewall.
that one worked, as well.
the virus seems to be gone.
gone?
that's weird.
l programmed the mainframe to quarantine the viruses, not delete them.
you think you can stop us, but we will never give up.
who the hell's behind this?
hey, masuda,
i've been meaning to ask you about something i've had on my mind.
what is it, nanami?
do you think maybe you could work on making less noise when you eat?
l get distracted while i'm driving.
sorry i eat so loud!
that wasn't your fault, ichiro.
come on.
hey!
look at that traffic light!
what's that about?
hello?
nanami!
we just got a call saying that there's been a train derailment!
apparently, it was an empty express train at shinjuku station!
similar incidents are happening all over town!
there seems to be a problem with the railway's computer system.
l need you to get on this fast!
got it.
some unexpected glitches are happening here on our end, too.
here's another news flash!
atms all over the city have gone out of control!
out of control.
ya think?
as you can see behind me, the city is out of control.
atms cause chaos across the nation
computers are the cause behind this chaos.
they seem to all have gone haywire.
it's the same virus.
it's spreading into the public sector now.
what is this?
i will fight for the weak and for those who have no voice.
who's doing this?
this is the control tower.
what's going on?
the navigation system's crashed!
i've lost control!
mayday!
minister kuroda. we have an emergency, sir.
someone's hacked into the computer system of one of our sdf fighters.
he's out of control.
minister, requesting permission to dispatch ramon zero in order to intercept.
not yet.
it's too soon for that.
but...
right now, it's our plan b.
help!
is it because of the firewall?
the problems that we are experiencing are being caused by the firewall that we placed in the arc reactor.
i don't like this.
we have to help those fighter pilots.
we need to deactivate the firewall.
hold on.
if we do that, that virus will contaminate the reactor.
we don't really have a choice.
l see.
deactivating the firewall.
well, that was a little too close for comfort.
you spoke too soon.
l fight for justice.
my duty is to crush tony stark's evil ambitions.
talk about slander.
what a load of nonsense.
the only thing i'm advocating here is peace.
you make me laugh.
you can't hide your true self behind that iron mask.
the virus is about to penetrate the main system.
it's dangerous.
we have to shut down the arc reactor immediately.
there's no need for that.
this freak's main objective is to infect the arc reactor.
but i've got a little surprise for him.
you mean...
l mean, me.
there's no other way.
i've got to use myself as bait.
but you...
i've got to do this to protect the arc station.
understood.
computer, open iron man os port 157.
mr. stark!
hey!
there!
what was that?
iron man?
they're fighting.
his will power versus that virus.
hang in there, tony stark.
are you okay?
what's going on?
why did you crash?
get away.
i'm not myself right now.
quit acting like you care.
there's no way you can deceive someone like me.
sho!
it's all yours!
it's mine!
get out of the way!
sho!
are you okay?
i'm sorry, mom.
i really am.
now you know why i've asked you not to go outside, honey.
l know how you feel.
it's tough.
you know, there's a special reason why you're the way you are.
you're more fragile, so you can better appreciate the importance of life.
what you're going through now is going to make you a great person when you grow up.
l believe that.
and then you will work to help people.
you will be able to protect many people.
why?
in this world, there are so many people who hurt others without remorse.
mom, i promise you.
i'll try not to be such a person.
i will never hurt anyone.
sho, you have such a good heart.
l gave yinsen my word.
i can't fail.
l can't fail.
i will protect the arc station by all means.
hey, mom!
i'm home!
mom?
mom, you're pushing yourself way too hard.
your cough's gotten even worse.
i'm fine, i just can't shake this cold.
you better stay away, son.
l really wanna make sure you don't catch this thing.
mom?
mom!
mom, no!
don't go!
please, you can't!
don't leave me here all alone!
sho, don't ever for get that promise you made.
l read your paper.
your treatise about converting people's will power into a program code.
about fusing people with computers.
but i don't think people really understood it.
l believe your idea deserves merit.
who are you?
we are the zodiac and we understand you.
what do you think?
can you help us?
for the greater good, of course.
our enemy is tony stark.
he works for the military and hides his true evil intentions behind a mask.
we're depending on you to eliminate him.
you will save thousands of lives if you do.
please save the people.
sorry, yinsen, doesn't look like i'll be able to keep that promise i made.
what promise was that?
using my powers to help others.
l promised.
what's happened to me?
am i helping or am i hurting?
in this world, there are so many people who hurt others without remorse.
mom, i promise you.
i'll try not to be such a person.
was i wrong this whole time?
sho, don't ever for get that promise you made me.
the virus.
it's gone!
mr. stark, you did it!
you destroyed the virus!
not quite.
actually, it deleted itself.
it deleted itself.
l kept my promise to you, mom.
zodiac?
this is bad.
the virus used up a lot of my power.
what the... what is that?
who the hell are you?
through great lengths, iron man saved the city from the mysterious cyber-terrorist attack.
yeah, i'm happy with my article.
l hope mr. stark will like it, too.
what?
tony stark is missing?
next time on iron man:
bail-out.
what?
chika is missing, as well?
next episode:
#7:
bail-out.
__file_terminal__
who the hell is he?
what the... who are you?
#7:
at the mercy of my friends
who could that have been?
dr. tanaka?
doc?
what are you doing?
i'm beat and so hungry.
that interview went on for ever.
what a waste of time.
i feel your pain, but dealing with stuff like that is just part of the job.
my brain knows that, but my stomach doesn't.
i'm starving.
i said i'm starving.
masuda!
tony stark just passed us!
are you sure?
yes, that's his car.
where the heck is stark going at this time of night?
do you smell what i smell ?
sure do!
i love that smell !
it's the smell of a big scoop!
follow that smell !
all set.
i'm ready to shoot.
make sure you catch those kodak moments.
you bet!
masuda, are you okay?
yeah.
what just happened?
not sure.
let's just get out of here.
yeah.
mr. stark!
he's gone!
where could he be?
nanami.
look at that.
that's strange!
i've got a bad feeling about this.
i think we should call the cops.
i agree.
it 's getting too dangerous.
this is nanami ota from the tokyo journal i need to report some...
dr. tanaka!
are you okay?
wake up.
stark?
where are we?
who knows?
from what i see, i'd say we've been kidnapped.
but if so, why's that door open?
no guards either.
it doesn't add up.
well, now, i guess that answers the guard question.
so, doc, any idea where the heck we might be?
actually, yes.
i'm guessing we're still near japan on one of those islands that's used as a landfill .
we've got our very own trash island.
not the best vacation spot.
what's going on?
what the hell is this crap?
couldn't they just have taken my wallet instead?
never heard of a reactor thief.
are you all right?
well, that depends on your definition of all right.
i'd be dead in a few minutes without my reactor.
since i'm still alive, i'm guessing they've replaced my arc reactor with this pacemaker.
who could 've done this to you?
not sure.
but whoever it is, they obviously want me to stick around a little longer.
yinsen!
it's been a while, hasn't it, stark?
i knew it!
you've been alive this whole time.
well, it depends on how you look at it.
the yinsen you knew is dead.
what does that mean?
the man you see here now is part of the zodiac.
i don't believe that.
you'd never join zodiac.
you're the one who told me to use my abilities for peace.
what the...
yes, i was the one who took this from you.
your life is in my hands.
i gave you life once.
why not take it back, huh?
that pacemaker i put in you will only last 24 hours before it stops.
i'll give you till then to decide whether or not you want to join the zodiac.
what?
please.
no one can create amazing weaponry like you can.
the zodiac needs someone with such a talent.
anyway, why not go back to what you're really good at, tony?
cut the crap!
i'll never go back to being that person again.
never say never.
well, then, you've got 24 hours to decide.
i should warn you, don't waste your time trying to escape.
wait!
mr. stark!
i can't believe it.
why would yinsen do this?
i remember you telling me about him before.
you said he changed your life.
he did.
he didn't just save my life that day, he saved my soul, as well .
the way i live my life now, i owe that all to him.
he saved me.
the world
needs you, tony.
use all of your wealth and knowledge to finish what we've started.
it is your destiny.
you see, yinsen hated violence as a means to an end.
so it's inconceivable that he would join the zodiac.
it makes no sense.
it's best not to dwell on that now.
we need to figure out a way to escape.
right. we need to get back to the station.
i have spare reactors there.
is that...
yeah, but it's worthless.
no reception, huh?
but we've got more than just your cell phone here.
look at all this material we can use.
how resourceful tethering my cell phone to connect to the internet, huh?
yeah, we should be able to connect with the outside world now.
the word, "impossible " only exists in the dictionary for fools .
we've blocked all wireless signals within a 10 km radius of the island.
call me when you figure out how to fix that.
hold on!
tell me, yinsen!
what exactly happened to you?
why?
i don't think you have time for small talk .
your time is precious, make the best of it.
tony stark.
you're brilliant when it comes to dealing with any type of situation.
but that will get you to see things as they really are.
uncover the real you and realize that you are destined to create weaponry.
just as altering genes can change people physically,
i'll tap into the core of your psyche, stark.
you'll be back to your old self in no time.
all i have to do is show you something that'll trigger the process.
mr. stark, you should rest.
let's keep going.
i'm done for either way.
we have to do whatever it takes to get off this island.
dr. yinsen, give me an update.
everything's going fine.
i'm reviewing all the data right now.
i'll send my analsis as soon as i'm done.
what about stark?
let's just say that he's running out of time.
all we need now is a bottle of champagne for the launch.
well, doc, we did it!
let's get the hell out of here.
it's best you lie down.
i feel weak.
i'm sorry.
without my reactor, i feel worthless.
well, that just isn't true.
not based on what i've seen.
what do you mean?
in spite of being weakened, you've kept seeking out solutions.
that's very impressive.
i really mean it.
even more so than when you're successful in everything.
then i should try to get beaten up more often, shouldn't i?
but that can wait.
so what's next?
i saw a yacht hidden in that cove over there.
it's probably yinsen's.
and that's our ticket home.
but what if we get attacked like last time?
unless we have a weapon...
yeah, but i wouldn't create a weapon.
why not?
i have to show yinsen that i'm not the same man he once knew.
nanami, wake up!
nanami!
look at you two!
i'm sorry...
pull your self together!
we have a guest!
so not just mr. stark?
dr. tanaka, too?
that's right.
lab 23 has reported that she's missing.
i'd like for you to tell me everything you saw that night.
of course.
there was an incident reported this morning about radio interference activity coming from a ship.
right here.
and this is the pier where mr. stark's car was found.
now, do you remember which direction the boat you saw was heading?
well ...
maybe this might help ?
what is that?
i have no idea, but this thing fell on us when we were following mr. stark's car.
great job!
you were ready for those kodak moments!
you finally earned my respect!
thanks, nanami.
where did he...
that's odd.
he's taking too long this time.
what's he up to?
something's wrong.
scorpio, fire on stark.
what the hell has he done?
it's a hologram!
our cover's blown.
keep running!
he's had his chance.
end this.
once you're cornered, the old you will come back to us again.
are you okay?
look at your ankle .
can you walk ?
mr. stark, there isn't much time before he catches up to us.
go without me.
i'm not leaving you.
the world really needs you!
you have to survive.
so please go!
i can't.
i need to fulfill my dream.
your dream?
yes, to live in a world at peace.
a world without violence.
that's my dream.
i need your help in order to make that world a reality.
you should be safe here.
i'm sorry.
not nearly as sorry as i am.
because of me, you're being chased by that giant scorpion.
no, that's not true.
because of you, i now have a dream.
well, that's a first.
i never heard you talk about your self before.
and i'd love to hear more, but...
damn mech!
this could work.
hey, sweet cheeks!
at last!
the real tony stark!
that's it!
kill your enemy!
immerse your self in blood,
stark, so you can revert back into the warmonger you once were!
it's about time we start seeing the real tony stark!
go on, obliterate the enemy!
blast him to hell !
what?
don't worry.
this was all just a test.
that was quite impressive, jamming the signal against us.
you're definitely not the tony stark i once knew.
next time will be different.
boy, do i owe you one.
no, on the contrary, i owe you one.
i think we're even.
captain sakurai!
so it was you?
if you want to thank someone, you should talk to that reporter that's always chasing you.
nanami?
i can see it.
look!
it 's our rescue ship!
tell them to turn around.
i think i'd rather spend a little more time with you.
i've never seen such a beautiful sunset.
it seems so pure because there's no one on this contaminated island.
you know, i wish the whole world could see this one sunset.
that would be another dream of yours?
yeah.
when you have a bad feeling about something, you hope that it won't come true.
i couldn't believe that tony stark got kidnapped!
i've got to find out what happened to him exactly .
dr. tanaka was with him.
i must get this interview!
wait.
who's that little girl standing next to him?
next time on iron man:
daughterof the zodiac.
next episode:
#8:
daughterof the zodiac
oh, my, is she his secret daughter?
this could be a huge scoop!
__file_terminal__
what the hell is this?
a human?
what's happening?
a monster!
#8:
daughter of the zodiac
chika!
why don't we go grab something to eat after this?
i made reservations at a restaurant with good ambience!
i'm sorry.
i still have a ton of work to do.
excuse me.
what was i thinking?
i didn't expect to get turned down.
i will never understand women.
are you okay?
are you hurt?
i finally found you!
you're iron man.
tony stark.
how do you know my name?
i know you.
i'm aki.
i ran away from the zodiac.
so you came to me because you want me to shelter you?
you want me to save you, right?
yup.
it's hard to believe that a normaã kid her age is connected to the zodiac.
hey, listen.
you seem skeptical do you want to see my special powers?
this is...
do you believe me now?
why did you come to me?
well, they said that you keep giving them trouble .
so that means you're strong, right?
so i thought you could protect me... who is "they"?
what is the zodiac planning?
i'm sorry.
please don't cry.
this is a nasty scene.
a special ops squad raided a zodiac weapons stash.
but they met resistance and this is the result, huh?
captain sakurai!
we succeeded in salvaging some data.
here it is.
this has turned into a weird situation.
yes, this is nanami.
hi, it's me.
sorry for calling so late, but i need a favor.
where'd she go?
i was wondering what you were doing out of your room. what are you up to?
doing some cleaning!
you're a kid, you don't have to worry about that.
aki, weren't there documents here?
yeah, but they were a big mess so i cleaned up and put them over there!
hey, tony!
what's this?
hold it!
don't touch that!
wow, this is amazing!
aki!
there are many dangerous things in this room.
you can't just touch...
are you okay?
i'll get it!
wait!
relax.
you came here on business.
there's nothing awkward about this.
it's okay.
excuse me.
who are you?
i ran across some interesting data and wanted mr. stark to look at it.
and you are?
i'm aki!
tony's daughter!
what?
sorry about that.
no, i'm at fault for taking a child 's joke seriously .
i'm glad you've calmed down.
so, what brings you here?
i mean, not that you need a reason.
hey, tony!
you are welcome anytime.
my...
and i'm not just trying to flatter you.
i never lie.
i'm a man of my word!
so, are you tony's girlfriend?
we're business associates, mr. stark and i work together.
well, i'd say that's a good thing.
tony seems pretty loose with women!
don't say things like that!
what did i do?
but, you called a lady last night!
you were awake?
mr.
stark.
it 's not what it looks like!
that call was...
please look through the materials by tomorrow, mr. stark.
wait!
i'm leaving.
you'd better give up on that lady.
that's enough from you!
first, you completely trash my lab.
and now you're trying to mess up my personaly life?
don't give me that whole story about the zodiac.
tony.
tony, you're stupid!
today's my day for getting knocked over.
hello!
do you work at this orphanage?
i'm nanami ota from the tokyo journal
i'm trying to gather information on the girl in this photo.
if you know her, i'd like to talk to you.
aki?
where'd she run off to?
she's being hunted by the zodiac.
it's me, nanami.
about that aki girl ..
did you find anything?
she lost her parents two years ago in a plane crash.
the plane they were on was hijacked and it crashed.
she came to this institution after the accident.
but, about a year and a half ago, people wanted to adopt her, so...
they didn't seem to know what happened to aki after she left the orphanage.
is that so?
and...
it seems someone else has been asking about aki, too.
there you are.
honestly, i was worried.
be a bit...
don't you want to play with them?
if i play with them, they'll be in danger.
i'm not that good at controlling my powers.
it was the same with mom and dad.
i'm sorry.
tony?
aki, don't act like you're all alone, okay?
you consider me your friend, right?
yeah!
well then you better hang on, 'cause we got a lot fun ahead of us, little lady!
all right, shall we go home?
okay.
captain sakurai, what brings you here?
mr. stark, please give us that zodiac girl
so, you were the one asking about her?
sorry, but i'm gonna have to say no to your request.
i don't like using violence, but...
tony!
where am i?
are you awake?
you son of a...
aki!
don't worry, she's just sleeping.
she's just a kid!
it's to prevent her from using her powers.
her brain can generate an incredibly strong magnetic field .
if she uses it on the iron in the blood of others, she can fling them away without touching them.
this is... we recovered this from a zodiac factory the other day.
according to this, the zodiac was developing weapons using her power.
i don't know what kind of weapons they are, but i want you to help analyze them.
in order to protect japan.
i'll help you, but only for aki.
it's coming!
it 's coming!
virgo!
virgo?
what's going on?
it's an attack!
what is that?
aki!
everyone, retreat!
you idiot!
that's dangerous!
follow that car!
what's happening to aki?
i'm not sure.
there are some abnormalities in her mri scan.
damn it.
take a look at this flash drive.
you should be able to figure something out.
unidentified flying object detected!
it's closing in on us!
i'm going to hold that thing off!
you're pretty good, but how about this?
your weakness is that you can't attack and defend your self at the same time!
aki!
that's impossible .
this is the final blow!
wait!
stop!
hold your fire, immediately!
why?
aki's brain seems to be connected to that zodiac robot.
every shot you fire at that thing affects her.
that's nasty.
mr. stark!
come in, stark!
tony.
i have to go.
tony!
no, aki, you can't get up yet!
don't touch me!
tony's going to die, i have to save him!
why you...
i'm glad.
you're safe now, tony.
aki!
zodiac, i won't let you do anything else!
what is this?
did it absorb her?
the energy level is out of control it's gone berserk!
aki!
what are you doing, sakurai?
do you wish to die?
look at that!
activate the emp barrier!
hurry!
the emp barrier!
good thinking, chika!
but the barrier won't hold for long.
at this rate, aki doesn't stand a chance!
you're waiting till she runs out of steam?
do you know how much damage that will cause in the meantime?
are you planning on risking everything for one girl
chika, this suit is protected against emp, right?
it should be able to handle that electromagnetic storm for a short while .
that's correct.
in theory.
what are you doing?
saving aki!
it 's too dangerous!
i have to try!
that's crazy.
if i play with them, they'll be in danger.
aki.
i'm glad.
you're safe now, tony.
stark!
aki.
tony.
you came to help me.
didn't i tell you i would ?
we're friends.
iron man has evacuated the enemy machine!
both mr. stark and the little girl are safe!
raise the emp shield to maximum output!
hold off the decay energy!
okay!
ready?
here i go!
she's recovered.
yeah, now she's just a normal little girl
but...
sorry!
thanks a lot, mister!
she doesn't remember you.
or her powers.
it's all good.
she now has the chance to live a happy, normal life.
now, come on!
we have to complete the arc station for the kids.
yes, tony.
that kid sure looked happy.
it must mean she's doing well with her foster parents!
oh, yeah, tony stark made an important request.
he wants me to look into the activation of the arc reactor!
i must be moving up in the world as a journalist if tony stark is asking me for information!
come on, mr. masuda, let's get going!
next time on iron man:
versus iron man!
wait, what does that mean?
next episode:
#7:
versus iron man!
__file_terminal__
you're awake?
you shouldn't move yet.
who are you?
it's all right.
you're safe here.
what is that?
what are you making?
wait just a little bit longer.
here you go.
thank you!
me, too, me, too!
all right.
one month later
yinsen!
can you give me a hand here?
you can do that by yourself !
honestly .
bill always tries to slack off.
yinsen!
let's play a game when your work is done!
sure!
but after you do your school work!
that's not fair.
yinsen, you're a jerk!
i mean it!
why are you grinning?
there are no changes to the plan.
carry it out.
understood.
thank you for accepting the interview with us today!
#9:
a duel of iron
the arc reactor will soon enter full operation.
before that, i want you two to do me a favor.
i think it's really amazing that you can generate an infinite amount of clean energy!
the necessary atomic fuel should be delivered soon.
it's atomic fuel?
there are still plenty of people who doubt the arc reactor's safety.
i want you two to dispel that fear with an article .
all right.
currently transiting point 372.
nothing to report.
everything is going according to schedule .
this is yokosuka base.
roger.
what did you say?
the transport squad?
yes.
we received notification that they're under attack by an unidentified assailant.
they're currently exchanging fire.
get troops there at once!
yes, sir.
you've said the arc reactor is the first step in your world peace initiative, but how would you personally define world peace, mr. stark?
that's a good question.
for people to live freely without any bloodshed.
freel ?
i live my way, you live your way.
everybody lives the way that suits them.
that's my oath.
to make that a reality, i'll over come every challenge.
feel free to tour the station after wards.
i'll just be a second.
what is it, chika?
i've got terrible news, mr. stark.
the plutonium transport is under attack.
what?
did we get him?
that's ridiculous!
what do you mean, i can't go at a time like this?
it's an order from minister kuroda.
minister kuroda?
why?
where's the transport vehicle ?
that's impressive power.
who on earth is it?
a plutonium reading!
is it below?
give me back the plutonium!
yinsen!
is it you?
do you want this?
yinsen, what are you planning to do with that?
you hated violence so much.
why are you doing this?
what on earth happened?
yinsen!
why are you hesitating?
if you won't attack, i will !
i'll show you the power of the dio you made!
stop it, yinsen!
i don't want to fight you!
you're being controlled by zodiac!
open your eyes, yinsen!
i thought i told you.
i'm not the man i was before!
yinsen.
i've always been looking at death.
what do you mean?
is it the sdf?
what?
sorry, but i'm running behind schedule .
you can play with this.
that's...
the plutonium!
hold it, yinsen!
cut it out now!
did i lose him?
yinsen.
this is a grave situation.
he must be planning something horrific.
he can't be.
not in this country.
this country has been seared twice in the flames of atomic weapons.
by your country.
that tragedy must never happen again.
ever.
i will get the plutonium back.
whatever it takes.
if you don't get it back, you will also have to take responsibility for this.
you may face deportation.
keep that in mind.
stark.
do you have business with me?
i apologize.
if i'd been there, things would not have come to this.
don't worry about that.
do you have any information, though?
no, unfortunately, we have no new info.
is that so?
is that chika?
it 's me, stark.
stark.
i'll tell you the location of the plutonium.
yinsen?
we were interrupted before.
let's finish this.
what did you say?
what are you thinking?
it's all your fault, stark.
since that time, i've always been looking at death.
even now.
always.
that's a present for sandra's wedding, right?
mayor!
i couldn't think of anything else.
i can't pay her back with words.
i want her to be happy.
bless bill and sandra!
hurray!
congratulations!
here's to a long and happy life!
what's that?
sandra!
where are you?
sandra!
that's...
indeed.
i lost my family twice because of your weapons.
yinsen, i understand that you want me to atone.
but you need to understand that i'm working to prevent that tragedy from repeating itself .
you don't understand anything.
you are making the same mistakes overand overagain.
it seems we need to settle this one-on-one.
i'm waiting for you.
wait!
yinsen!
damn it.
that phone call ...
it was from him, right?
nothing to do with you.
wait!
recovering the plutonium is my mission, too.
i'm coming along.
let me go alone this time.
if something happens to me, i'm trusting you to pick up the slack.
stark?
understood.
what's wrong, stark?
you won't get the plutonium back unless you defeat me!
is this all you can do, stark?
i made you an oath that i would use my power for a peaceful world .
so i'll definitely get the plutonium back and keep my promise to you!
for a peaceful world ?
are you still spouting that nonsense?
do you understand?
this is what power is.
who are you?
i'm the one who will give you true power, so you are no longer helpless.
so you can keep this tragedy from happening again.
what do you mean "true power"?
stark.
he is still using his power without any restraints.
look at iron man.
he claims it's for justice and peace, but in truth, he's no different from a terrorist.
he is a weapon.
you're the same as before!
your claims of peace and justice are just a new excuse!
you're wrong!
i don't build weapons anymore!
iron man is a weapon.
it is a murderous machine that brings destruction.
and you want to mass-produce the dio?
i'm building iron man for world peace!
you're deluded.
very well, i'll show you.
the weapons you made are already in operation.
what did you say?
i wonder what that is.
what?
they look like iron man, but the color's different.
mr. stark!
unknown iron man clones
have appeared around the arc station!
what the hell ?
it 's iron man sigma.
iron man sigma?
an unmanned iron man i created after analyzing the dio.
what?
the sigmas are acting on my orders.
stark, remember that iron man is a weapon!
activate the emp device!
it won't work!
i can't activate it!
what did you say?
what?
the iron man models have entered the arc station!
what's wrong, chika?
come in, chika!
do you understand now, stark?
your hands are still covered in blood.
that's wrong!
i fight for peace!
i give up.
you can watch what i do now from the afterlife, so you can realize what a fool you were.
yinsen!
i'll make sure that plutonium is put to good use, as well as the arc reactor.
you won't be needing your iron man armor when you're dead.
i will create a new bloodline.
i thought i could write a good article thanks to mr. stark's request, but i didn't expect this incident!
i have to do something quickly!
but the arc station is still occupied.
what should i do?
what do they want?
next time on iron man:
casualties of war,
i have to find tony stark...
no.
iron man!
next episode:
#10 :
casualties of war
__file_terminal__
who are you?
dr.
tanaka.
this is abrupt, but i need you to help ready the arc reactor.
where's mr. stark?
where's iron man?
that's...
iron man is dead!
#10:
iron will
nanami!
iron man is...
they said iron man is dead.
no way.
he can't be.
i heard those men talking about it.
mr. stark.
to make that a reality, i'll over come every challenge.
i'm sure he's alive.
i know it.
nanami.
i need to know what's going on outside.
we have to find a way out of here!
i'll distract them.
mr.
masuda!
don't move!
l..
the little boys' room?
what's your problem?
my snack.
you squished it.
why you...
i'm sorry, mr. masuda.
to take control of the arc station, what are the terrorists planning?
prime minister, please remain calm .
they are bound to send us demands at some point.
we've got a problem!
the terrorist group is broadcasting a message on television!
what?
to the government of japan.
we are zodiac.
we bring a new order to the world.
zodiac?
we have taken numerous hostages and the arc reactor.
if you fail to cooperate, we will execute the hostages.
if you continue to resist, we will cause the arc reactor to malfunction.
the resulting explosion from that energy will wipe japan off the face of the earth.
are they planning a suicide bombing?
if you don't want casualties, comply with our demands.
first, dissolve the alliance with america.
second, disarm the sdf immediately .
third, the diet must be frozen in perpetuity.
carry out these demands at once.
that's insane.
do they really think those crazy demands will be accepted?
halt !
put your hands up!
oh, man, they found me already?
what's this?
sir!
we found an intruder.
if you think they're gonna give in to your crazy demands, you're dreaming!
crazy demands,"you say?
i just asked your country to be what it really is.
what do you mean?
japan claims to renounce all war.
so why does it need military agreements or arms?
this country doesn't need such a contradictory diet. we will lead japan.
we will bring a new order to the world .
we don't need a terrorist's help !
what a brave young lady.
take her away.
go!
start walking!
what's your problem?
get in!
where am i?
he really beat the crap out of you, huh?
sakurai!
the arc station is in enemy hands.
we'd better figure out our next move.
where's your armor?
i wasn't allowed to use ramon zero.
it 's not like minister kuroda to make such a decision.
you just lost about half your value.
coming from a guy who managed to lose his suit, that's pretty convincing.
it was ling nearby.
it 's yours, right?
thanks.
so what are you gonna do now?
take back the iron man suit, of course.
chika!
mr. stark!
i'm so glad you're okay.
yeah, i'm glad you're okay, too.
yes, but the station is still in their hands.
they're making me ready the reactor.
i understand.
but the iron man suit was taken.
it's probably somewhere in the arc station.
understood.
i'll look.
i found it.
what are you doing?
what's wrong, chika?
chika!
seems the preparations for the arc reactor's activation are complete.
chika!
what's wrong, chika?
so you're alive, stark?
just you wait.
i'll kill you soon.
build a communications point and dispatch sagittarius.
kill him.
there's no way we can accept those demands!
the terrorist group must know that, too.
could they have some other goal?
they have hostages!
we must proceed with caution.
no matter their goals, as long as they have hostages, some sort of measure is needed.
do you have a plan?
an sdf special forces team is currently on standby.
with the prime minister's permission, we can assault the arc station immediately .
use force?
what would the casualties be in that case?
about a third of the hostages.
i cannot accept this plan!
it would dishonor my name for all time!
prime minister, if this continues, the mass media will have a field day.
there will be too many casualties!
gentlemen.
i ask that you leave this incident to me.
even if you say that, what if you mess up?
i have an idea.
of course, i have no objections if you say i did this on my own initiative.
i will not cause you any trouble .
the japanese government is debating its response to the terrorists' demands.
we have yet to reach a conclusion.
if this continues, the hostages' lives may be in danger.
therefore, as a private citizen, not as a member of the government,
i would like to offer myself, in exchange for the release of all hostages.
what?
my life may not be enough, but i sincerely hope that zodiac will accept this proposal
i've heard the defense minister's address.
normally, he has no right to make demands on us.
however, in recognition of his valor in risking his life to save his citizens, we will accept the hostage trade.
get in there!
ms. chika!
nanami!
where's mr. stark?
what happened to him?
he's alive.
i'm glad.
we can't rest easy yet.
he can't fight like this.
i have to get the iron man suit to him somehow.
i'll help, too.
making agreements with zodiac, the ramon zero incident...
what happened to minister kuroda?
iron man is a weapon.
it is a murderous machine that brings destruction.
i may just be skilled at making tools for death and killing.
what's wrong?
i made iron man to bring peace.
but now, weapons that use iron man as a basis are putting people 's lives at risk.
was i wrong?
that's not it.
it may look like iron man, but it's not.
it's missing something important.
something important?
may i ask you a question?
what is it?
ms. chika, are you and mr. stark... what about mr. stark?
no, it's nothing.
let me ask a question, too.
you're a journalist.
why are you going this far?
that's... we've arrived.
i found it!
welcome, minister kuroda.
now release the hostages as you promised.
nanami.
they're catching up to us, sakurai!
i know!
mr.
stark, do you hear me?
that voice...
nanami?
why you?
i heard the story from chika.
i've got the iron man suit and i'm headed your way.
really?
thanks!
thank chika for taking out the enemy's surveillance net work.
i've already confirmed your location.
i'll send you the coordinates, so let's meet up!
i'll be bait.
you act in the meantime.
understood.
i'll come back as soon as i get the iron man suit.
mr. stark!
thanks for coming.
how's chika?
she's still at the arc station.
there was something she wanted to check out.
is that so?
mr. stark!
i'm sorry.
i'm okay.
do you have to fight even though you're so beat up?
yes.
this is my mission.
i'm off.
you'd better evacuate somewhere safe, too.
please wait.
it's nothing.
be careful
take this!
that's enough!
what's it like to suffer at the hands of iron man, stark?
damn it!
you aren't iron man!
you're missing something important!
don't insult me!
i was right!
there are signs that someone modified the defense system.
so that's why the emp barrierdidn't work!
who is it?
aren't you the one who was with nanami?
have you seen nanami?
you said that iron man is a weapon, but that's wrong!
i put what you gave me into iron man...
my oath to fight for justice!
that's the real source of my power!
you're so wrapped up in your tragedy that you lost sight of it!
do you think your naive justice can save the world ?
absolute power is everything!
die, iron man!
are you okay?
iron man!
could it be that he stopped attacking so as to not hurt those two?
what?
sigma!
why did you take that hit for me?
because i felt that inside, you're still the same as me.
ridiculous!
i lost that the day my loved ones were taken from me.
weren't they your friends?
they're acting under someone else's orders!
i've lost control they're coming!
damn it!
yinsen!
yinsen, why did you join zodiac?
i wanted power, even if it was power born from evil
to bring peace.
but now, i've realized that what i really resented was my own inability to act.
you accepted your power and made it serve you.
is that the real difference between the two of us, stark?
zodiac's real plans are only just beginning.
stop them.
what a relief!
i safely got the iron man suit to him.
i was able to help out a bit!
what?
tony stark is under arrest?
what's going on?
what's he accused of?
editor-in-chief!
i'm going to investigate and find out the truth!
next time on iron man:
the beginning of the end.
there's gotta be another side to this story!
next episode:
#11 :
the beginning of the end
__file_terminal__
zodiac's real plans are only just beginning.
stop them.
you have my word, yinsen.
i'll take the zodiac apart with my bare hands if i have to.
the long and intense standoff between the arc station, the sdf, and unknown terrorists has finally come to an end.
#11:
the beginning of the end
the breakthrough came when the minister proposed himself in exchange for the captive.
it was quite a bold and dramatic move.
some would say it was heroic.
meanwhile, questions and doubts surround stark industries and the company's ceo.
some critics are even going as far as linking tony stark to the terrorist group known as the zodiac.
minister kuroda, i have to commend you on your courage.
your timely and selfless gesture defused what could have been a dire situation.
on behalf of stark industries, i'd like to express my gratitude.
don't be hasty.
you may find your gratitude misplaced, mr. stark.
things have become complicated.
in what way?
there seems to be a general consensus that you've been careless about the reactor's security.
that's absurd!
no, it's not.
considering my history, it's not at all unexpected.
if you want to investigate, go ahead.
the arc reactor is an open book.
yes, of course.
i have confidence in you.
i'm terribly sorry, but...
captain sakurai!
sorry, mr. stark.
would you please come with me?
what the hell 's going on?
i apologize for all of this, but as i said, it's complicated.
you see, it's... well, there are allegations that you your self are a member of the zodiac.
now, that's absurd.
you can't possibly believe that!
of course not.
i don't believe these rumors are true, but until we've had a chance to clear your name,
i'm afraid you'll have to remain in sdf custody.
for your own good, more than anything.
wait a minute!
if anyone's gonna clear my name, it's gonna be me!
you'll just have to trust us to handle it this one time.
i'm gonna do everything in my power to help .
i'm positive we'll get to the bottom of this in no time.
i want to talk to the us embassy right now.
you have that right.
you're damn right i do!
it's him all right.
they've got tony stark locked up at the back of that thing!
we've just received confirmation!
right now, it appears that tony stark is in sdf custody!
a dark cloud now hovers over stark industries in japan.
unbelievable . what in the world is going on?
why would they want to arrest him?
driver, take the next exit up ahead.
nothing to worry about, just a little detour.
but, sir, those weren't the minister's orders.
i'll take full responsibility.
now you've got me breaking the rules.
see what you've done?
my heart bleeds for you.
so just where is it you're taking me, anyway?
my home. why, do you have other plans?
okay, nagato.
what are we doing here, exactly ?
i have to teach you something.
a crash course in the japanese way of thinking.
and i'm going to be your teacher.
i think i've had enough of the japanese way of thinking for one day.
okay!
lesson one:
how to run away from your opponent.
you know how to do that well .
sometimes the wisest thing to do is hold back.
you dismiss it as cowardice, but we call it strategy.
the japanese mindset at work, huh?
i understand your passion,
but what you call weakness, i call a setup.
your way isn't the only way, you know.
we americans have a few ideas of our own.
not quite as refined as yours, but they seem to get the job done.
yeah, it's cheating.
but how?
colonel the whole base has lost power!
can we operate?
negative, sir!
attention!
primary power systems are inactive!
code red.
security breach!
i repeat!
code red.
security breach!
sir, none of the sdf bases are responding!
what the hell ?
this sdf base and everyone in it are now under our control
if you resist, we will kill you.
arc station, order!
any member who has anything to say will be recognized.
give me a break!
chief, this is my story!
forget it!
you've already got a story!
the hostage situation!
oh, no!
six airborne missiles strike government!
i know, but come on, that's yesterday's news.
this is hot!
many members of parliament have been killed.
the diet has been destroyed.
due to this terrorist attack...
citizens of japan, we are the zodiac.
your government is no more.
we have taken over your special defense forces.
this country is in our hands.
we now reign over it.
our first demand, is the immediate release of our comrade-in-arms, tony stark.
if he is not released at once, unharmed, sdf hostages will perish.
release tony stark, immediately .
what do you say to that, stark?
someone's going through a lot of trouble to make me look bad.
you don't really think i had anything to do with that, do you?
but why would they...
minister kuroda, are you all right?
yes, for the moment, but i'm sure they'll be coming for me any minute now.
before they do, i'm issuing my final order.
i will never hand stark over, at least not alive.
execute him now.
but, sir!
setting aside the legality of that order, we don't know for sure if he's even part of this.
i think it's pretty clear.
it should be to you, too.
stark has been planning this all along, and the arms trade chose this country to begin world domination.
things will get worse.
if you give them stark...
hey, buddy.
you might want to take cover.
the door is about to explode!
what was that?
answer me!
what's going on?
captain sakurai, are you all right?
captain!
captain, can you hear me?
are you there?
yes sir, i'm here.
what the hell happened?
it was a timed explosive.
stark is gone.
he's escaped.
damn it!
if that doesn't convince you, nothing will .
i'm sending you ramon zero.
armor up and kill stark.
but, sir, what about their threat to kill the hostages?
those hostages are members of the sdf.
they are ready to put their lives on the line, for their country.
if you love your country, it's time for you to do the same!
you have a choice.
you either kill stark or the country gets destroyed.
consider it a lesson in the tony stark way of thinking.
go for stark.
yeah, i'm all right.
and i'm free.
now, all i have to do is find out who's setting me up.
tony, there's something seriously wrong with the arc reactor.
and i can't explain how it happened.
get to the point.
someone broke into the core somehow.
they're re-routing all of the reactor's power.
find out how they're getting in and block them.
i can't!
the system shows no security breech.
it 's not a hacker.
i've tried everything and can't get around it.
i can't stop it, tony.
we have to. who has access to the system?
there's no one else who knows the system like i do.
tony, i'm the only one who could 've done this.
what are you trying to say?
i wish i knew.
but i think i might...
calm down. what is it?
there's a sudden spike in the output.
the arc reactor's energy is being sent to a specific location.
so where's all the energy going?
find out where it's being sent!
right.
tony, i've got the location.
somewhere in tokyo bay.
i'm transmitting the exact coordinates to you now.
put the phone down and step away from the console .
chika!
what's going on?
nothing i can't take care of.
chika!
if you love your country, it's time for you to do the same!
you have a choice.
you either kill stark or the country gets destroyed.
iron man?
what's he doing?
sakurai!
don't do it, sakurai!
we're wasting time!
if you want to fight against evil, help me fight the zodiac!
first japan, then the world .
is that it?
sakurai, believe me.
you won't fight, coward?
i think someone once told me that only a wise man knows when to hold off and take his time.
and exploit his opponent's weakness.
what'd i tell you?
the zodiac!
think about it, you also tried to kill me.
why are you still thinking that i am with zodiac?
their objective is not this.
someone's taking the arc reactor's energy and sending it toward tokyo bay.
you need to find the source and get us some answers.
i'll handle this, you get moving!
i'll trust you this time, but so help me, stark,
i swear, if you're ling to me...
yeah, yeah, whatever.
just go, will you?
it's being sent somewhere under the bay.
right near the aqua-line!
there!
what is that?
welcome to the future.
the zodiac command center.
these people have also been created here.
the completed one is this one.
you are too little to fight against this.
i sincerely regret that it had to end this way, my dear captain sakurai.
what?
no, it can't be!
impossible !
oh, no.
hurry up!
minister kuroda, why?
why are you doing this?
i wouldn't have to be doing it if you'd loved your country enough to kill stark when i told you to.
i meant how could you join the zodiac?
why, sir?
it 's insane!
our nation is falling apart.
it's on the brink of destruction.
but i can pull it back together.
i can save it.
i have the strength to do what must be done!
it's now time.
first, japan will be a garrison state.
then i will dominate the world !
you're mad!
and all this time, i looked up to you and obeyed your every command.
i admired you!
and for that, i'll give you one last chance.
swear allegiance to the zodiac, captain, and i'll spare your life.
traitor!
do you really think i could ever do that?
no!
you're not man enough!
but i want you to know, sakurai, that i always thought of you as a son.
two warriors, face-to-face.
fighting to the death.
disappointing.
i thought you'd be a worthy opponent.
die!
all right, it's working.
her power's running low.
there's only one little problem.
so is mine!
stark
i'm here, captain.
what is it?
what did you find?
i found...
i can't hear you.
you're breaking up.
i found out who's behind this whole thing.
it's minister kuroda.
kuroda?
yeah, the old man's one of them.
he's a zodiac.
tony, i'm done.
that's it.
what the hell are you talking about?
i still need your help !
i wish i could, believe me.
what?
no!
hang in there!
help the nation, stark.
sakurai?
sakurai!
oh, no!
the diet has been bombed.
and tony stark is one of the terrorists.
i don't believe that.
because iron man is a hero.
next time on iron man:
endgame.
i have to see the end of this story.
next episode:
#12 :
endgame
__file_terminal__
i found out who's behind this whole thing.
it's minister kuroda.
yeah, the old man's one of them.
he's a zodiac.
tony, i'm done.
that's it.
what?
no!
hang in there!
help the nation, stark.
sakurai?
sakurai!
#12:
endgame
my fellow countrymen, all is well .
as the only surviving member of the diet, it is my duty to keep the great nation of japan on its feet.
and i will .
our courage will help us through these times and japan shall be reborn.
my people, i ask for your patience.
as public safety is essential, certain measures will be taken in order to maintain order and peace.
martial law will temporarily be put into effect.
this is so messed up. we've already been through enough. when will it all end?
i know.
my vision for japan will soon be a reality.
minister!
we've received an urgent message from the us government.
go on, read it.
you cannot have our diplomats expelled from japan.
it is completely unacceptable .
cease your coup d'état at once.
renounce all rights to sovereignty.
ignore it.
sir, ignoring this ultimatum could mean trouble !
they could deploy military forces!
it's time for us to stand up for our selves and show that they have no authority in japan.
sakurai, where are you?
tony?
chika?
it's good to hear your voice.
it's great hearing yours.
i'm glad you're safe.
where are you now?
come meet me.
i'll be waiting for you at the lighthouse, all right?
is this about the energy?
yes.
copy that.
i'm headed toward the arc station.
chika, is everything all right?
like i told you during the hostage crisis, someone modified the energy supply program.
so a member of the zodiac infiltrated it?
no, not quite.
but something like that.
things like the program structure, idiosyncrasies...
it might be nothing, but to me...
i don't understand what you're trying to say.
i don't think i'm in control of myself .
i black out at times.
this doesn't make any sense.
you blacked out and reprogrammed the system?
i don't know, but i'm afraid.
i feel like someone else is controlling me.
there's no reason to believe something like that!
chika!
stop!
what the hell are you thinking?
stop!
please, wait.
listen to me!
there's no other possible explanation!
it may be hard to believe, but i am the one who made you suffer.
stop!
come back here.
i'm sorry.
i can't live with myself knowing that i might have helped the zodiac.
i betrayed the most important person of all .
i no longer have the desire to live.
betray me?
look, you didn't betray anyone, you... what the hell was that?
what's going on?
that's the us airbase.
what could it be?
it's the zodiac!
who the hell are you?
you haven't figured it out yet?
kuroda?
you son of a bitch.
why are you doing this?
my only wish is to change japan into what it should be.
what's the point to all this?
haven't you destroyed enough?
there's no need for you to understand, you bastard!
japan is on the rise at this very moment!
it is now the aptly named land of the rising sun's moment of glory!
and dr. tanaka has been such a great help .
chika!
what have you done to chika?
have you fallen in love with her, stark?
how amusing it is to watch you fall for your own weakness.
chika?
chicka!
i wish i had time to watch you two, but the new japan requires my full attention.
wait!
kuroda!
damn!
i need to snap her out of this zodiac business!
nanami, you're going the wrong way!
the chief just assigned asked that we cover the devastation at the base!
i heard him.
he's just not seeing the whole picture.
but i do.
that thing that destroyed the base looked like a zodiac.
you think so?
we have to find tony stark.
he's the key.
and he'll tell us what's really going on.
but how?
we'll never find him, he could be anywhere.
it's him!
stop this, chika!
it 's me, come on!
i won't do it.
i won't fight you.
i can't.
listen to me.
chika!
snap out of it!
you must remember who you are!
here, look into my eyes.
it 's me.
it 's tony.
that's it, chika!
keep fighting!
chika, it's you.
you came back.
tony?
it's okay, you're all right.
what am i?
tony!
what have i done?
don't worry.
i trust you.
so you should believe in your self, too.
tony!
how could i have ever let this happen?
none of this is your fault .
how can you say that?
how can i know what i'll do next?
what if i hurt you?
even if you get out of control again, you know i'll always have your back.
you were always there for me.
so i'll for give you for anything.
the only thing i won't forgive you for is dying on me.
tony.
i want you by my side, always.
thank you, tony.
i'll miss you.
chika?
damn it, chika, stay with me.
i want you to know that you've meant so much to me.
come on, stop that talk .
i'm gonna get you out of here.
get you all fixed up.
hey, mr. stark!
we want to...
dr. tanaka!
why is she in that suit?
nanami, i need your help !
i need you to get chika to a hospital immediately!
sure!
chika, i have to go deal with kuroda, but i'll be back as soon as i can.
chika, i'll never forgive you if you die on me!
okay.
i'll try to be strong for you.
be safe.
all right, then. we need to go now.
you're badly injured.
nanami,
i'll give you the biggest story of your life if you do me a favor.
what's kuroda's current location?
target is heading north.
current location, sector 223.
extrapolating from his current flight path, how long until i intercept him?
at present velocity, you will reach kuroda in approximately one minute.
what sector?
sector 004, the nagatacho district.
i'm the only one left who could stop him.
finally, it's time.
and now, japan will be mine.
him again!
stubborn bastard.
ah, well .
it will be so satisfying to snap stark's spine and christen my armor with his blood.
kuroda, you were behind the zodiac!
but why?
are you that dumb?
you already know why!
to save japan!
you're delusional japan needs to be protected from you!
what do you know about japan?
your people already tried to eradicate my country!
how many of them vanished when you dropped the a-bomb?
we can't re-write history, but we can save innocent people from dying today!
you're the one desecrating japan now!
you're so wrong!
as a zodiac, i am turning japan into the strongest military nation on earth.
and cleansing the world with the holy fire of war!
ultimately, the zodiac and japan shall rule the world !
chika, you have to stop working!
you need medical attention, the sooner the better!
thank you for your concern.
but i still have this unfinished business to handle .
doctor, please, you can catch up on work some other time!
right now, the arc station's reactor is completely under kuroda's control
he's taking power from the station for his armor.
minister kuroda?
i helped create this reactor.
if anyone can recalibrate the power transfer, it's me.
but if you don't get help, you'll die.
there's no other way.
we had an incident similar to this.
one of the zodiac agents infiltrated the station.
his digital consciousness got into the station's mainframe.
i'm working on doing the same thing, but i'm going into the station's reactor core.
that doesn't sound very safe.
when you digitize your mind, what effect will it have on your body?
i promised him!
i told mr. stark i'd take care of you!
it doesn't matter what happens to me, as long as i help tony.
thank you for all your help so far, nanami.
hold it!
you can't sacrifice your self for this!
this is the only way i can help tony.
i think it's about time you joined your dear friend, captain sakurai.
what are you talking about?
i killed him with these very hands.
you murdered him?
you're done.
your technology doesn't stand a chance against mine!
tanaka studied your suit, and combined it with the ramon zero tech to create my armor!
everything about it is better than yours!
after all, it was made in japan!
your little girlfriend designed my suit just so that i can annihilate you, iron man.
thank you for making me a part of something bigger than myself .
i wish i could stay.
tony.
what's up, chika?
i'm sending you some coordinates.
you need to get there as soon as possible .
what are you doing?
rerouting the reactor's power.
i'm sending it to you via photon beam.
use it all .
wait a minute, didn't kuroda lock you completely out of his system?
i have another way to get in.
i'm inserting my consciousness directly into the reactor core.
don't do it!
you could kill your self, chika!
there's no other way to defeat kuroda.
don't do it, chika!
i'm not asking you to do something like that!
come on!
stop it, chika!
thank you for everything, tony.
i will always be with you in your dreams.
initiating countdown.
ten, nine, eight, seven...
stark, i'll take your blood, for the rebirth of a new, different japan.
die!
help the nation, stark.
i want you to know that you've meant so much to me.
what?
he won't be able to function for long!
...one, zero, ignite.
no!
the reactor energy connection!
it's dropped!
how can this be?
damn!
she's gone.
poor chika.
she sacrificed herself to save us.
one month later
this is the arc station.
at this very moment, we are witnessing a historic event.
mankind's dream, perpetual energy!
the thing fulfilling this dream, the arc reactor.
it will finally be activated.
please take a look.
such an impressive and lovely light show.
now, mankind must swear to use this energy peacefully and efficiently for our future, for our happiness, for ever and ever.
chika, we did it. we pulled it off together.
we managed to save the world .
__file_terminal__
look around you.
everything moves, everything orbits.
it is how we are born.
the sun, the moon, the planets and the stars watch.
we are at the centre.
our place.
but, nicolaus copernicus came and said that the sun stood at the centre and that we moved around it.
just like the other planets.
an earth that moves?
but can't we see or feel that?
that was 1543.
galileo made a telescope and pointed it at the sky in 1610.
he discovered moons around jupiter and saw how these orbited around the planet in hours and days.
later christiaan huygens and dominique cassini discovered moons around planet saturn.
everything seemed to orbit something.
could it be true?
johannes kepler described these movements isaac newton caught them.
from apple to planet: everything obeyed his laws.
what about us?
we became usedto it and knew no better than the sun stood at the centre and we orbited around it.
and the stars that we see?
what about that band of nebulous light, the milky way?
different cultures had given it different interpretations.
for the egyptians it was isis' wheat, the incas saw it as golden star dust, for the eskimos it was a band of snow and the christians thought of it as the road to rome.
it turned out that the milky way is made of stars:
hundreds, thousands millions of stars.
and then we discovered the nebulae.
some were spiral shaped, other oval or irregular.
where did they belong to?
how did everything fit together?
we, the stars, the milky way, the nebulae?
in the middle of the 19th century we knew that the stars were in fact like the sun.
that they must be very far away.
and that the sun was very close by
and that was the universe, a collection of stars
and our place in all that?
spiral galaxy the milky way unravelled
a film by maarten roos in collaboration with pieter-rim de kroon
in the middle of the 19th century the introduction of photography
caused a big change in the field of astronomical observations.
before, astronomers had used visual techniques to map the stars of the northern sky.
looking through a telescope they had swept the northern sky and catalogued each star, their positions and brightness,
up to a certain limit.
this catalogue of northern stars was also called a 'durchmusterung', a german word for survey.
with the introduction of astronomical photography an astronomer at the southern hemisphere said:
'let us complete the northern catalogue with all the southern stars, using photographic techniques'
this astronomer was david gill, the director of the observatory cape of good hope.
i am sitting next to a photographic telescope very similar to the one used by david gill.
to take photos with the telescope you need to constantly check that it stays pointed at the same part of the sky
you have to compensate for the daily apparent movement of the stars in the sky
so, there is a place where the photographic plate is put, about here.
that is the focal plane of the telescope.
parallel to it, there is another telescope, here below.
you look through this second telescope with your eye to check that the instrument follows the stars correctly and at the same time an image is taken with the other telescope,
of that bit of the sky.
that could take several minutes or even longer.
when done, the exposed plate had to be changed for an unexposed one and the telescope pointed at a different part of the sky.
and this procedure continued until one had covered the entire sky with photographic plates
em started this big project to photograph the entire southern sky.
but he did not immediately think about measuring all these plates
around the same time, the astronomer kapteyn became professor of astronomy in groningen .
it was expected that he would get a big telescope, but for unknown reasons this did not happen.
and so kapteyn thought:
'well, there must be useful work to be done also without a telescope.'
and the idea was born.
that he could collaborate with david gill from the cape observatory to perform that huge task of measuring all the plates gill had been collecting.
both astronomers got into contact about this idea and it quickly led to an agreement:
kapteyn would measure the plates, while gill continued ro collect new ones.
one can ask whether they realised the size of such an undertaking.
kapteyn began enthusiastically and it took him several years to finish the work.
it was published in three thick volumes.
a copy can be found at the kapteyn institute in groningen.
they contain nothing more than columns of numbers, indicating the positions and brightness of all stars on the plates.
this huge work became known as the cape photographic durchmusterung.
it was this big achievement that lead kapteyn to first distinguish himself at that time.
but in the meantime, he must surely have thought about other questions in astronomy.
and one of those questions caught his attention early on:
the properties of the ensemble of stars we see in the sky, the milky way galaxy.
at the beginning of the 20th century around 1904, he made an important discovery in this area.
he noticed that the stars did not move randomly through space, but that their movements had preferential directions.
within the astronomical community that was a very important discovery:
the fact that there was regularity in something astronomers had always considered to be chaotic!
thanks to this discovery he established his name even more so, which helped him pursue his plans for further research on the milky way galaxy in collaboration with institutions abroad.
at the end of his working life,
kapteyn had constructed an idea about how the big ensemble of stars of which we are part, fits together.
he had found a model that best fitted all the data he had collected overtime:
information about distances and movements of the stars.
we now call this the kapteyn model.
the kapteyn model was much like a thick disc.
in the centre part of this disc the stars were densely packed in space.
and towards the edges of the disc the stars were further and further apart.
in terms of size, from the centre towards the edge of the disc was about 30,000 light years,
meaning that light has to travel 30,000 years to cover that distance.
in the direction perpendicular to the disc the size was much smaller, of the order of 7,000 light years.
so, it's a model that is quite easy to understand.
and kapteyn must have felt it as a great satisfaction that he had found a model of which he could say:
'this is how things must be.'
jacobus kapteyn had found a model for the universe:
a disc like structure with the sun near the centre.
it explained the milky way.
but there were other scientists who disagreed with this model.
new observations indicated that the universe must be much bigger than what kapteyn had proposed.
a big debate took place in the early 1920s.
it became clear that the spiral nebulae must be very tar away way beyond the borders of the kapteyn universe.
slowly this new vision gained terrain.
and the idea that we were also part of such a flat spiral nebula began to grow
and that the sun was not at the centre.
at the end of the 1920s the young astronomer jan oort derived the rotation of the galaxy from movements of the stars in the sun's neighbourhood.
it also explained the star streams
kapteyn had discovered at the beginning of the 20th century
but how could we get an impression of the entire galaxy?
large quantities of dust between the stars obscured a clear view to distant parts and the centre.
for twenty years people searched for a solution.
i studied astronomy and mathematics and physics of course.
in april/march 1943 all students had to sign a declaration of loyalty towards the german occupiers
it you did not want to do that, you had to work in germany.
most students did not want that either and they had to hide.
that is more easily said than done, because where to hide?
at a farm?
but i did not know any farmers.
or in the north-east polder, where a lot of students hid.
i was lucky to hide here at this observatory, together with a fellow student, hans hubbenet.
we came here in may 1943.
we were put in a small room, door locked, curtains closed, and we sat silently all day long.
after 6 p.m., when the observatory's personnel had left, we were allowed to leave the room, but at 8 a.m. we had to be back.
and so we did day after day, and it went fine.
we were still in a scientific environment, so i could not have imagined any better place to hide.
there were a couple of other students as well.
hans and i were the only ones hidden, but there was another student, three years older than me,
henk van de hulst.
henk hacl finished his studies, except for the final exam, which he could not do, because the university was closed.
and he had one big advantage: he was an assistant at the observatory.
so on his id card was written:
assistant.
wehreas on mine it said:
student.
and the germans were arresting the students.
but an assistant could be an accountant's assistant or a pharmacy's assistant or anything else.
so henk could move around freely.
early in 1944 something happened that we found very special.
henk received an invitation from prof. oort, the director of the leiden observatory, to come and work with him for a few months.
today this is quite normal.
but at the time, it was like going to a different continent!
contacts were rare.
and henk went to leiden, and from time to time we received news about his stay, the people at leiden, the things that were going on there.
henk came back after a few months with a very intriguing story.
what was this story?
oort had told henk that in the years before the war,
american physicists and engineers had detected radio emission from the universe.
that was something completely new and unheard of.
where did that radio emission come from?
oort wanted to detect and analyse that emission too, as soon as the war was over.
and he said: 'it would be so interesting, scientifically speaking, if there was a specific wavelength where the radio emission were stronger than at other wavelengths,
so that you could concentrate on that.'
and so he asked henk:
'since you are going back to utrecht now, could you look into this hypothesis:
is there a wavelength where the radio emission is stronger than at other wavelengths?
and so as we were hidden here, we heard this story.
we asked henk how he would proceed and he said that he would check it with prof. rosenfeld.
rosenfeld was a belgium professor of theoretical physics, a real master of quantum mechanics, etc.
so, he went to see this professor.
and rosenfeld asked him:
'what is the most abundant gas or element in the universe?
answer: 'hydrogen, professor.'
'well', he said, 'then we should start by looking at hydrogen.
and that's not so difficult, because hydrogen is the most simple atom that we know'
it consists of one electrically charged proton at the centre and one electrically charged electron that orbits the centre, just like a planet around the sun.
and both proton and electron also spin around their own axis.
they can do that in the same direction
or in the opposite direction.
and in the first case the system has more energy than in the second case.
when the electron spin ﬂips, it loses energy,
which is emitted as radio emission.
and rosenfeld said: 'henk, now you calculate at what wavelength that emission is radiated.'
well, that was not too difficult, a quick, simple, calculation.
the answer was: 21 cm!
at a wavelength of 21 cm we could expect more radiation than at all the other wavelengths around it.
but the real question was: 'is that radiation detectable?
because rosenfeld quickly calculated that the probability of a spin flip occurrence, is very low.
per hydrogen atom it happens once every ten million years!
imagine, ten million years.
and when you hear that you think:
'there's no chance one can detect that radiation.'
but there is so much hydrogen in the universe that adding all those tiny chances, a detectable amount of radiation should be produced.
henk did some further work to determine how much radiation could be expected and he concluded that it should be possible to detect it.
in april 1944 there was a meeting of the dutch astronomy club, the association of professional dutch astronomers
they met three times a year, still today.
but back then there was only a small number of participants, because students could not attend and also because travel was difficult during the war.
at this small meeting henk presented his prediction:
'we expect radio emission from the universe at a wavelength of 21 cm and we, in the netherlands, must make an effort to detect it, to discover it.'
the prediction by henk van de hulst was but a prediction.
it was impossible to do scientific experiments in those times, especially when this had to do with radio techniques.
but if it were true, if that emission really existed, it would be a very powerful tool to study the galaxy.
because emission from that wavelength went practically unhindered by the clouds of dust, so emission from all parts oi the galaxy would be visible!
after the war, oort immediately wanted to build a large telescope, with a diameter of 25 meter.
yet, industry and technique were only slowly building again.
financial support for such a project was also not available.
but oort became impatient.
fortunately the dutch telecommunication service had moved several german radar dishes from the dunes to the radio station at kootwijk.
they were the so-called würzburg dishes, that had been part of the atlantic wall.
engineer de voogt from the ptt made one of these dishes available for research on the galaxy in 1948.
we hope this is the right spot.
no traces were left of the old radar mirror,
which was removed in the late 50s.
we do see the old main building of the radio station and a few other buildings.
looking at them we feel that this must be the right spot.
we are now in hoeven, next to a german radar telescope, a würzburg riese.
i am a bit confused by the colour, because this white colour does not fit.
in fact, all those hundreds of radar telescopes, that formed the atlantic wall, had dazzle-painting green.
but for the rest it is a real würzburg riese telescope, 7.5 meters diameter, a small stair, everything.
in addition to a würzburg mirror, a good receiver was also needed.
but 21 cm receivers did not exist at that time.
and at the technical school at delft, no engineers had been trained during the war.
oort had to manage with a student of physics from leiden, who started to try to put together a receiver.
yet, after a year and a halt he had not made much progress and then he did something wrong and the entire receiver caught fire.
on march 10, 1950 a year and a half worth of work was lost.
then oort found a good engineer, someone from the new generation after the war:
lex muller.
in addition muller was also an active radio amateur.
in the end of 1950 he came to work at the
dutch foundation for radio-emission from the sun and the milky way galaxy.
he came to kootwijk and five months later he managed to deted the 21 cm line emission from the milky way galaxy
may 11,1951.
one and a half month earlier a student at the harvard university ,
harold ewen, had detected the emission for the first time.
no surprise, because the americans had a huge advance because they had a lot of experience with microwave techniques, which they had developed during the war.
henk van de hulst was at harvard at that time and he organised the communication between harvard, leiden and kootwijk.
the results of those first detections were published together.
for several weeks lex mulder did test observation.
and concluded that he needed a much better receiver in order to do a large survey
so, he took everything apart and spent a year building a better receiver.
in march 1952, just before the new receiver was finished,
i went to kootwijk for a month and a half to calibrate our radio telescope.
we had to know exactly in which direction the instrument would be pointing.
for this we needed new scale-indicators in azimuth and height, corresponding to the horizontal and vertical movements of the telescope.
together with a technician from radio station kootwijk we improved the existing scale-indicators.
because they were inaccurate and had a wrong reference point.
we also determined the small errors that still remained,
so that we could correct for them.
once this was finished, in june 1952, the first large survey along the milky way equator started.
after my study of electronics, i came here in 1954.
there was a small cabin next to the telescope where i worked.
we mapped the milky way.
the observations were done day and night by students from leiden, who came to kootwijk.
there were always three students, one observed during the day, one during the evening and another during the night.
i supported them during the day and evening.
in the telescope there was a clock that needed to be set right.
in order to move the dish there were two handles, one tor the azimuth, one for the elevation.
because the earth rotates, one had to correct the position every three minutes.
lists for these positions were prepared in leiden.
it was a complete manual process.
the first series of measurements lasted one year from june 1952 through june 1953.
in the meantime, henk van de huist received an invitation from oxford to give the famous halley lecture in may 1953.
in that lecture he wanted to show the first map of the distribution of hydrogen clouds in the galaxy.
so, we had to make that map before his talk.
in order to put together the first map of the galaxy,
oort, the director of the leiden observatory, organised a crash-action.
all the personnel of the observatory participated.
i did too, together with my fellow students
maarten schmidt and gart westerhout.
we sat there, i'd almost say, locked up in the observatory's lecture room for a week.
our task was to process the observations from kootwijk, do some calculations and give the results to van de hulst so that he could put together a map.
everybody had a pile of observations from the same position in the sky.
each observation was a registration oi the radio emission as a function of wavelength or frequency i have an example here.
this registration starts as a wiggling line near zero where there is no radio emission.
it rises to a maximum, a lot of radio emission.
it then drops a bit, rises again to an even higher maximum and finally drops back to zero.
what happened?
the receiver changed frequency very slowly over a one or two hour period.
it recorded the hydrogen radio emission at different frequencies.
why was this done?
well, i remind you of the doppler effect that everybody knows from a passing police car or ambulance.
such a car produces a sound of a certain tone.
and you know that as the car approaches, the tone sounds higher than when it moves away
the higher the tone, the higher the frequency of the sound wave .
and that depends on the speed of the car relative to you.
the same principle was applied at the radio receiver in kootwijk.
it observed the radio waves emitted by hydrogen atoms.
when the atoms move towards us, we perceive a higher frequency, when they move away a lower frequency
higher frequencies mean shorter wavelengths.
lower frequencies mean longer wavelengths.
that principle has been applied here.
this registration shows the intensity of the radio emission at different frequencies.
that corresponds to the number oi hydrogen atoms moving at different velocities, in that one direction in the galaxy.
our task was to measure the radio intensities at different frequencies.
from these we determined the number of hydrogen atoms and we calculated their velocities.
in addition, several measurements had been done at each position, because the radio emission is weak and the receiver has quite some noise.
we needed to reduce the noise and so we had to repeat the measurements several times
we averaged three, five or ten of these in order to reduce the noise and amplify the signal.
and that was the product we delivered to henk van de hulst.
he then determined where in the galaxy the hydrogen atoms with different velocities were located.
here you see the result and you see that the hydrogen clouds form a spiral shaped band around the galactic centre.
here is the sun, here the galactic centre and the hydrogen clouds form an arm around it.
very similar to what we knew from extragalactic spiral nebulae.
that was a first indication that our galaxy has indeed spiral arms of hydrogen gas.
that was something completely new.
and that was the big surprise
van de hulst unveiled during his lecture in oxford:
based on the observations from kootwijk, a spiral structure had been discovered.
after van de hulst's oxford lecture a second survey started in november 1953.
in this survey we not only observed along the milky way equator, but also 10 degrees above and 10 degrees below.
we observed several hundreds of positions.
we measured the radio emission as a function of velocity and determined from those the positions of hydrogen clouds in the galaxy.
not only in the equatorial plane, but also above and below.
we made a three dimensional map of the distribution of hydrogen gas in the galaxy.
and so we mapped the entire galaxy, as it was visible from the netherlands, because from the netherlands one can not observe the entire galaxy.
that resulted in this beautiful colour map.
it was so nice that it proudly hang on a wall in the observatory for months and went to several international conferences.
you can see four spiral arms.
the outer arm, that was also observed in the previous survey, and the dark coloured areas in the inner parts of the galaxy.
but, as you can see, a part is missing.
that is the part that cannot be observed from the netherlands.
however, colleague astronomers in sydney, australia had also started to do radio observations.
the leader of that group, frank kerr, tame to leiden to collaborate.
he processed his data in a similar way as had been done by us in our surveys.
and this map shows the combination of the dutch results, that we saw in colour just before, and the australian results.
there is a difference between both parts.
the dutch part of the map looks sharper than the australian part, because of the slightly different methods of calculation used.
but the spiral arms from both parts do connect!
the triumphal point of the diagram is that you can clearly see that the hydrogen gas in the galaxy is distributed in spiral arms.
just like the paper's title says:
'the galactic system as a spiral nebula.'
the galaxy is a spiral galaxy.
comparable to the spiral nebulae we have known for long from photographic observation, like this one.
that was the great result from the survey done at kootwijk in collaboration with our colleagues from sydney.
our place had now been clearly shown:
a planet around a regular star at the edge of a regular galaxy with stars, gas and dust in spiral arms
a galaxy as there are millions and millions.
dutch astronomy had made a significant and valuable contribution to this new insight.
the netherlands continue to play an important role in an area where new discoveries are still being made, new instruments are being developed and the frontiers of our know-how and knowledge are constantly being pushed out.
a film by maarten roos in collaboration with pieter-rim de kroon with
but do not think we have finished.
the change of vision that happened in the past one hundred years, take my word for it, will happen again in the coming one hundred years.
and we do not have the faintest idea how where that will lead.
we always have to be prepared that new perspectives will come that are now beyond our imagination.
one has never finished.
music by
with support from initiative produced by
translation:
maarten roos, with thanks to margarida serote roos and maria suzete serote nunes
__file_terminal__
okay yeah sorry for today's go to people who express okay yes %uh to part cutest prepay alright missed
i year known to thank you session that got here the best what okay tooth i i'll the light only just got a good changeup
have enough by at necessary
okay bop lol we have okay yeah
i 40 hey i'm for anything i got for analysis every get best value for 384 smoke kills and i'll got a while
beto water 035 13th nah i love and the for said they already have fl
string bass 0 peace %ah off topic
okay its youth kleevage 86 hale's 3 basis yeah okay check yes me okay
i think we need to well about that i and yeah anymore st somehow it you can edit unless you could also do it facebook find out more information clinton's heading back yeah 3 all well think sweet all see well
clearly this week yeah sir okay now i am
diego expressway the situation peace tugboat sorry just in the past these you space floods tennessee's lead said tank
__file_terminal__
baby i knew at once that you were meant for me
deep in my soul i know that i'm your destiny
though you're unsure
why fight the tide
don't think so much
let your heart decide
oh, baby i see your future and it's tied to mine
i look in your eyes and see you searching for a sign
but you'll never fall
til you let go
don't be so scared
of what you don't know
true to your heart you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
someone you know is on your side can set you free
i can do that for you if you believe in me
why second-guess
what feels so right
just trust your heart
and you'll see the light
true to your heart you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
your heart knows whats good for you
let your heart show you the way
it'll see you through ohh
boy, my heart is driving me to where you are
you can take both hands off the wheel and still get far
be swept away
enjoy the ride
you won't get lost
with your heart to guide you
true to your heart you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
true to your heart
you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
__file_terminal__
yes i'm let loose,
from the noose,
that's kept me hanging about.
i've been looking at the sky,
'cause it's gettin' me high,
forget the hearse 'cause i never die.
i got nine lives,
cat's eyes,
abusin' every one of them and running wild.
'cause i'm back,
yes, i'm back,
well, i'm back,
yes, i'm back,
well, i'm back, back,
well, i'm back in black,
yes, i'm back in black.
back in the back,
of a cadillac,
number one with a bullet, i'm a power pack.
yes, i'm in a bang,
with a gang,
they've got to catch me if they want me to hang.
cause i'm back on the track,
and i'm beatin' the flack,
nobody's gonna get me on another rack.
so look at me now,
i'm just makin' my play,
don't try to push your luck, just get out of my way.
'cause i'm back, yes i'm back,
well, i'm back, yes i'm back,
well, i'm back, back,
well i'm back in black,
yes i'm back in black.
well i'm back, yes i'm back,
well i'm back, back,
well, i'm back in black,
yes, i'm back in black,
ohooohooo yeah!
oh yeah!
yes i know!
aieeee yeah!
yeah!
ohhhh yeah, yeah!
give it up!
well i'm back, back,
back, back,
back in black,
yes i'm back in black!
out of sight!
i hit the sack,
i've been too long, i'm glad to be back,
__file_terminal__
she was a fast machine
she kept her motor clean
she was the best damn woman that i ever seen
she had the sightless eyes
telling me no lies
knockin' me out with those american thighs
taking more than her share
had me fighting for air
she told me to come but i was already there
'cause the walls start shaking
the earth was quaking
my mind was aching
and we were making it and you
shook me all night long
yeah you shook me all night long
working double time
on the seduction line
she was one of a kind, she's just mine all mine
wanted no applause
just another course
made a meal out of me and came back for more
had to cool me down
to take another round
now i'm back in the ring to take another swing
'cause the walls were shaking
the earth was quaking
my mind was aching
and we were making it and you
shook me all night long
yeah you shook me all night long
and knocked me out and then you
shook me all night long
you had me shakin' and you
shook me all night long
yeah you shook me
well you took me
you shook me all night long
yeah you shook me all night long
you really took me and you
shook me all night long
you got me doing it and you
shook me all night long
yeah you shook me
you know you shook me
all night long
__file_terminal__
every time when i look in the mirror
all these lines on my face getting clearer
the past is gone
it went by, like dusk to dawn
isn't that the way
everybody's got their dues in life to pay
i know nobody knows
where it comes and where it goes
i know it's everybody sin
you got to lose to know how to win
half my life
is books, written pages
live and learn from fools and from sages
you know it's true
oh, all these feelings come back to you
sing with me, sing for the years
sing for the laughter, sing for the tears
sing with me, just for today
maybe tomorrow, the good lord will take you away
sing with me, sing for the year
sing for the laughter, sing for the tear
sing with me, just for today
maybe tomorrow, the good lord will take you away
dream on, dream on, dream on
dream until your dreams come true
dream on, dream on, dream on
dream until your dreams come true
dream on, dream on, dream on, dream on
sing with me, sing for the year
sing for the laughter, sing for the tear
sing with me, just for today
maybe tomorrow, the good lord will take you away
sing with me, sing for the year
sing for the laughter, sing for the tear
sing with me, just for today
maybe tomorrow, the good lord will take you away
__file_terminal__
hi honey, how are you doing?
i'm doing good.
how are you tonight?
what's your name?
billy.
billy, i like that name.
are you a good little boy
yes
oh yes
how old are you billy
twenty-six
i'm an entertainment lawyer in beverly hills
sweet emotion
you talk about things that nobody cares
you're wearing out things that nobody wears
you're calling my name but i gotta make clear
i can't say baby where i'll be in a year
when some sweet hog mama with a face like a gent
said my get up and go must've got up and went
well i got good news, she's a real good liar
'cause the backstage boogie set your pants on fire
sweet emotion
i pulled into town in a police car
your daddy said i took it just a little too far
you're telling me things but your girlfriend lied
you can't catch me 'cause the rabbit done died
yes it did
you stand in the front just a shakin' your ass
i'll take you backstage, you can drink from my glass
i talk about something you can sure understand
'cause a month on the road an' i'll be eating from your hand
come on billy
it's been real fun billy
yeah
call me again sometime honey
[baby fusses]
__file_terminal__
i'm lying alone with my head on the phone
thinking of you till it hurts
i know you hurt too but what else can we do
tormented and torn apart
i wish i could carry your smile in my heart
for times when my life seems so low
it would make me believe what tomorrow could bring
when today doesn't really know, doesn't really know
i'm all out of love, i'm so lost without you
i know you were right believing for so long
i'm all out of love, what am i without you
i can't be too late to say that i was so wrong
i want you to come back and carry me home
away from these long lonely nights
i'm reaching for you, are you feeling it too
does the feeling seem oh so right
and what would you say if i called on you now
and said that i can't hold on
there's no easy way, it gets harder each day
please love me or i'll be gone, i'll be gone
i'm all out of love, i'm so lost without you
i know you were right believing for so long
i'm all out of love, what am i without you
i can't be too late to say that i was so wrong
oh, what are you thinking of
what are you thinking of
i'm all out of love, i'm so lost without you
i know you were right believing for so long
i'm all out of love, what am i without you
i can't be too late i know i was so wrong
i'm all out of love, i'm so lost without you
i know you were right believing for so long
i'm all out of love, what am i without you
i can't be too late i know i was so wrong
i'm all out of love, i'm so lost without you
i know you were right believing for so long
i'm all out of love, what am i without you
i can't be too late to say that i was so wrong
__file_terminal__
[spoken] it's our honor to serve the emperor.
♪ i wanna be like other girls
[spoken] it can be a burden.
♪ i wanna be like other girls
♪ i wanna see what other girls see [spoken] it can be a burden.
♪ i wanna see what other girls see
[spoken] how did you decide between duty and heart?
♪ just to be free like other girls
[spoken] i guess i learned that my duty is to my heart.
♪ ♪ get to be
na na na,na na na,na na na,na na na,na na na,na na na, whoah
to wear my old jeans
to eat a whole cake
feel the sun on my feet
be quiet, be crazy
be anything i want to be
dance around in my underwear
to walk by myself
do nothing all day
to eat a whole cake
be cranky
no cameras no pressures
no phonies no hairjam
no people who think that they know me but don't
no platform shoes
i wanna be like other girls
i wanna see what other girls see
just to be free like other girls whoah, whoah
i wanna be like other girls
i wanna see what other girls see
just to be free like other girls
get to be
na na na,na na na,na na na,na na na,na na na,na na na, whoah
to stay in one place
to sleep until three
to meet a nice guy who likes me for me
no cameras no pressures
no phonies no hairjam
no people who think that they know me but don't
no platform shoes
i wanna be like other girls
i wanna see what other girls see
just to be free like other girls
i wanna be like other girls
i wanna see what other girls see
just to be free like other girls whoah, whoah
i wanna be like other girls
i wanna see what other girls see
just to be free like other girls
get to be
[spoken] mushu:
let's rig this plane for canonballs.
__file_terminal__
test, test.
[spoken]do you like the beatles?
1, 2, 3, 4
oh, flew in from miami beach b.o.a.c
didn't get to bed last night
on the way the paper bag was on my knee
man i had a dreadful flight
i'm back in the u.s.s.r
you don't know how lucky you are boys
back in the u.s.s.r
been away so long i hardly knew the place
gee, it's good to be back home
leave it 'till tomorrow to unpack my case
honey disconnect the phone
i'm back in the u.s.s.r
you don't know how lucky you are boys
back in the u.s, back in the u.s
back in the u.s.s.r
well the ukraine girls really knock me out
they leave the west behind
and moscow girls make me sing and shout
and georgia's always on my my my mind
oh, i'm back in the u.s.s.r
you don't know how lucky you are boys
back in the u.s.s.r
oh, the ukraine girls really knock me out
they leave the west behind
well moscow girls make me sing and shout
and georgia's always on my my my mind
oh, let me tell you
show me 'round your snow peaked mountains way down south
take me to your daddy's farm
let me hear your balalaika's ringin' out
come and keep your comrade warm
i'm back in the u.s.s.r
you don't know how lucky you are boys
back in the u.s.s.r, oh yeah
ooh, ooh, ooh.
[spoken] thank you [spoken] good night [spoken] thank you
don't take any shit from anybody
good night, thank you
__file_terminal__
what's the matter with the clothes i'm wearing
can't you tell that your tie's too wide
maybe i should buy some old tab collars
welcome back to the age of jive
where have you been hidin' out lately, honey
you can't dress trashy till you spend a lot of money
everybody's talkin' 'bout the new sound funny but it's still rock and roll to me
what's the matter with the car i'm driving
can't you tell that it's out of style
should i get a set of white wall tires
are you gonna cruise the miracle mile?
nowadays you can't be too sentimental
your best bet's a true baby blue continental
hot funk, cool punk, even if it's old junk
it's still rock and roll to me
oh, it doesn't matter what they say in the papers
'cause it's always been the same old scene
there's a new band in town
but you can't get the sound from a story in a magazine
aimed at your average teen
how about a pair of pink sidewinders
and a bright orange pair of pants?
you could really be a beau brummell baby
if you just give it half a chance.
don't waste your money on a new set of speakers
you get more mileage from a cheap pair of sneakers
next phase, new wave, dance craze, anyways
it's still rock and roll to me
what's the matter with the crowd i'm seeing
don't you know that they're out of touch
should i try to be a straight 'a' student
if you are then you think too much
don't you know about the new fashion honey
all you need are looks and a whole lotta money
it's the next phase, new wave, dance craze, anyways
it's still rock roll to me
everybody's talkin' 'bout the new sound funny but it's still rock and roll to me
__file_terminal__
you have to learn to pace yourself
pressure
you're just like everybody else
pressure
you've only had to run so far
so good
but you will come to a place
where the only thing you feel
are loaded guns in your face
and you'll have to deal with
pressure
you used to call me paranoid
pressure
but even you can not avoid
pressure
you turned the tap dance into your crusade
now here you are with your faith
and your peter pan advice
you have no scars on your face
and you cannot handle
pressure
all grown up and no place to go
psych 1, psych 2
what do you know?
all your life is channel 13
sesame street
what does it mean?
[spoken] i'll tell you what it means
pressure
ooooooh, pressure
don't ask for help
you're all alone
pressure
you'll have to answer
to your own
pressure
i'm sure you'll have some cosmic rationale
but here you are in the ninth
two men out and three men on
nowhere to look but inside
where we all respond to
pressure
all your life is time magazine
i read it too
what does it mean?
pressure
i'm sure you'll have some cosmic rationale
but here you are with your faith
and your peter pan advice
you have no scars on your face
and you cannot handle
pressure
one, two, three, four
pressure
__file_terminal__
oo-oo-oo
in the middle of the night
i go walking in my sleep
from the mountains of faith
to the river so deep
i must be lookin' for something
something sacred i lost
but the river is wide
and it's too hard to cross even though i know the river is wide
i walk down every evening and stand on the shore
i try to cross to the opposite side
so i can finally find what i've been looking for
in the middle of the night
i go walking in my sleep
through the valley of fear
to a river so deep
i've been searching for something
taken out of my soul
something i'd never lose
something somebody stole
i don't know why i go walking at night
but now i'm tired and i don't want to walk anymore
i hope it doesn't take the rest of my life
until i find what it is i've been looking for
in the middle of the night
i go walking in my sleep
through the jungle of doubt
to the river so deep
i know i'm searching for something
something so undefined
that it can only be seen
by the eyes of the blind
in the middle of the night
i'm not sure about a life after this
god knows i've never been a spiritual man
baptized by the fire, i wade into the river
that is runnin' through the promised land
in the middle of the night
i go walking in my sleep
through the desert of truth
to the river so deep
we all end in the ocean
we all start in the streams
we're all carried along
by the river of dreams
in the middle of the night
oo-oo-oo.
aa-aa-ah.
__file_terminal__
[bell dings]
oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
uptown girl
she's been living in her uptown world
i bet she never had a backstreet guy
i bet her mama never told her why
i'm gonna try for an uptown girl
she's been living in her white bread world
as long as anyone with hot blood can
and now she's looking for a downtown man
that's what i am
and when she knows what she wants from her time
and when she wakes up
and makes up her mind
she'll see i'm not so tough
just because
i'm in love with an uptown girl
you know i've seen her in her uptown world
she's getting tired of her high class toys
and all her presents from her uptown boys
she's got a choice
oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
uptown girl
you know i can't afford to buy her pearls
but maybe someday when my ship comes in
she'll understand what kind of guy i've been
and then i'll win
and when she's walking
she's looking so fine
and when she's talking
she'll say that she's mine
she'll say i'm not so tough
just because
i'm in love
with an uptown girl [motorcycle revs]
she's been living in her white bread world
as long as anyone with hot blood can
and now she's looking for her downtown man
that's what i am
oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
uptown girl
she's my uptown girl
you know i'm in love
with an uptown girl
my uptown girl
you know i'm in love
with an uptown girl
my uptown girl
[motorcycle revs]
[sound of motorcycle driving away]
__file_terminal__
[spoken] garth brooks
well i'm shameless when it comes to loving you
i'd do anything you want me to
i'd do anything at all
and i'm standing here for all the world to see
there ain't that much left of me
that has very far to fall
you know now i'm not a man who has ever been
insecure about the world i've been living in
i don't break easy, i have my pride
but if you need to be satisfied
i'm shameless, honey i don't have a prayer
anytime i see you standing there
i go down upon my knees
and i'm changing
i swore i'd never compromise
but you convinced me otherwise
i'll do anything you please
you see in all my life i've never found
what i couldn't resist, what i couldn't turn down
i could walk away from anyone i ever knew
but i can't walk away from you
i have never let anything have this much control over me
i worked too hard to call my life my own
and i built myself a world and it worked so perfectly
but it's your world now, i can't refuse
i never had so much to lose
i'm shameless
shameless
you know it should be easy for a man who's strong
to say he's sorry or admit when he's wrong
i've never lost anything i ever missed
but i've never been in love like this...
it's out of my hands
i'm shameless
i don't have the power now
and i don't want it anyhow
so i gotta let it go
i am shameless
shameless as a man can be
you can make a total fool of me
i just wanted you to know
i'm shameless
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
it's out of my hands
shameless
i'm so shameless
[spoken] billy joel
[spoken] garth brooks
__file_terminal__
walkin' down picket fence
run my hands along the edge and
music plays in my head
hear the song before i go to bed when
stars are bright outside my window
wake up to tree boughs filled up with snow
and i remember, oh i remember
i remember my summer with you
cherry popsicles sand in my toes
rolled down windows, hold my hand, hold me close
pick up your phone, wanna hear your voice again
like a fresh air like a windblown hair
i like you i don't care
why did it have to end?
summer love with my best friend
west coast winter breeze
as it blows through the palm trees and they
wear their ray bans and spray tans
oh i wish it was summer again when
stars are bright outside my window
wake up this song echoes off my pillow
and i remember, oh i remember
i remember my summer with you
cherry popsicles sand in my toes
rolled down windows, hold my hand, hold me close
pick up your phone, wanna hear your voice again
like a fresh air like a windblown hair
i like you i don't care
why did it have to end?
summer love with my best friend
i fly to you all the way across the states
i'd fly to you, hear me the winter day
oh, i'd follow the sun
and come right to your door
i remember my summer with you
cherry popsicles sand in my toes
rolled down windows, hold my hand, hold me close
pick up your phone, wanna hear your voice again
like a fresh air like a windblown hair
i like you i don't care
why did it have to end?
summer love with my best friend
cherry popsicles sand in my toes
rolled down windows, hold my hand, hold me close
pick up your phone, wanna hear your voice again
like a fresh air like a windblown hair
i like you i don't care
why did it have to end?
summer love with my best friend
__file_terminal__
[animal howls]
my maria
don't you know i've come a long long way
i been longin' to see her when she's around she takes my blues away
sweet maria
the sunlight surely hurts my eyes
i'm a lonely dreamer on a highway in the skies
maria
maria, i love you
my maria
there were some blue and sorrow times
just my thoughts about you bring back my piece of mind
gypsy lady
you're a miracle work for me
you set my soul free like a ship sailing on the sea
she is the sunlight when the skies are gray
she treats me so right, lady take me away
my maria
maria, i love you
my maria
maria, i love you
my maria
maria, i love you
my maria
maria, i love you
my maria
[fade] maria, i love you
__file_terminal__
born down in a dead man's town
the first kick i took was when i hit the ground
you end up like a dog that's been beat too much
till you spend half your life just covering up
born in the u.s.a.
i was born in the u.s.a.
born in the u.s.a.
got in a little hometown jam so they put a rifle in my hand
sent me off to a foreign land to go and kill the yellow man
born in the u.s.a.
i was born in the u.s.a.
come back home to the refinery
hiring man says "son if it was up to me
went down to see my v.a. man
he said "son don't you understand now
had a brother at khe sahn, fighting off the viet cong
they're still there he's all gone
he had a woman he loved in saigon
i got a picture of him in her arms now
down in the shadow of penitentiary
out by the gas fires of the refinery
i'm ten years burning down the road
nowhere to run ain't got nowhere to go
born in the u.s.a.
i was born in the u.s.a.
born in the u.s.a.
i'm a long gone daddy in the u.s.a.
born in the u.s.a.
i'm a cool rocking daddy in the u.s.a. now.
__file_terminal__
i look at you all see the love that's there sleeping
while my guitar gently weeps
i look at the floor and i see it needs sweeping
still my guitar gently weeps
i don't know why nobody told you
how to unfold your love
i don't know how someone controlled you
they bought and sold you
i look at the world and i see it's turning
while my guitar gently weeps
with every mistake we must surely be learning
still my guitar gently weeps
i don't know how you were diverted
you were perverted too
i don't know how you were inverted
no one alerted you
i look at you all see the love that's there sleeping
while my guitar gently weeps
oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
still my guitar gently weeps
oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
oh, oh, oh, oh
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
yeah, yeah, oh, ooh
__file_terminal__
you walked into the party like you were walking onto a yacht
your hat strategically dipped below one eye
your scarf it was apricot
you had one eye in the mirror as you watched yourself gavotte
and all the girls dreamed that they'd be your partner
they'd be your partner, and
you're so vain you probably think this song is about you
you're so vain
i'll bet you think this song is about you
don't you?
you had me several years ago
when i was still quite naive
well you said that we made such a pretty pair
and that you would never leave
but you gave away the things you loved
and one of them was me
i had some dreams, they were clouds in my coffee
clouds
clouds in my coffee, and
you're so vain
you probably think this song is about you
you're so vain
i'll bet you think this song is about you
don't you?
i had some dreams they were clouds in my coffee
clouds in my coffee, and
you're so vain
you probably think this song is about you
you're so vain
i'll bet you think this song is about you
don't you?
well i hear you went up to saratoga
and your horse naturally won
then you flew your lear jet up to nova scotia
to see the total eclipse of the sun
well you're where you should be all the time
and when you're not you're with
some underworld spy or the wife of a close friend
wife of a close friend, and
you're so vain
you probably think this song is about you
you're so vain
i'll bet you think this song is about you
don't you?
you're so vain
you probably think this song is about you
[repeat and fade] you're so vain you probably think this song is about you
__file_terminal__
mmmmm ...
i get wings to fly
oh, oh ...
i'm alive
yeah
when you call on me
when i hear you breathe
i get wings to fly
i feel that i'm alive
when you look at me
i can touch the sky
i know that i'm alive
when you bless the day
i just drift away
all my worries die
i'm glad that i'm alive
you've set my heart on fire
filled me with love
made me a woman on clouds above
i couldn't get much higher
my spirit takes flight
'cause i am alive, oh...
when you call on me
when i hear you breathe
i get wings to fly
i feel that i'm alive
when you reach for me
god knows that...
that i'll be the one
standing by through good and through trying times
and it's only begun
i can't wait for the rest of my life
when you call on me
when you reach for me
oh, when you reach for me
i get wings to fly
i feel that...
when you bless the day
i just drift away
all my worries die
i know that i'm alive
i get wings to fly
god knows that i'm alive
__file_terminal__
i'm looking back through the years
down this highway
memories, they all lead up to this one day
and many dreams lost along the way
haunt me still
i guess they always will
when love was too much to bear
i just left it there
but here i stand face to face
with this heart of mine
livin' without you i only fall behind
we had a love most people never find
all this time i never realized
and the courage i finally found
has made me turn around
there is only one road i'm walkin'
only one lifetime one heart to guide me
only one road i'm walkin'
but i'm gonna run back, i'm gonna run back
'cause i need you right here
beside me
i can still hear the song of your laughter
i can still taste the sorrow of your tears
we said goodbye but our hearts did not hear
now my love there's nothing left to fear
with all my heart put me through
it leads me back to you
there is only one road i'm walkin'
only one lifetime one heart to guide me
only one road i'm walkin'
i'm gonna run back, i'm gonna run back
'cause i need you right here
beside me
oh
beside me
there is only one road i'm walkin'
only one lifetime one heart to guide me
only one road i'm walkin'
i'm gonna run back, i'm gonna run back
'cause baby i need you here
beside me
i'm gonna run back, i'm gonna run back
'cause baby i need you here
beside me
__file_terminal__
girls:
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
come on
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
cyndi:
i come home in the morning light
my mother says when you gonna live your life right
oh mommy dear, we're not the fortunate ones
and girls, they wanna have fun
woah girls, they wanna have fun
girls:
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
come on
cyndi:
the phone rings in the middle of the night
my father yells what you gonna do with your life
oh daddy dear, you know you're still number one
but girls they wanna have fun
woah girls, they wanna have
thats all they really want
some fun
when the working day is done
you know girls they wanna have fun
girls:
come on
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
come on
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
and the boys they wanna have fun now
and the girls they wanna have fun
and the boys they wanna have fun
and the girls they wanna have fun
cyndi:
some boys take a beautiful girl
and hide her away from the rest of the world
i wanna be the one to walk in the sun
all:
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
come on
girls:
hey now, hey now
cyndi:
when the working day is done girls:
hey now, hey now
cyndi:
when the working day is done
you know girls they wanna have fun
girls:
and the boys they wanna have fun now
and the girls they wanna have fun
and the boys they wanna have fun
cyndi:
girls just wanna have fun now
girls:
fun
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have fun now
yea, yea, yea, yea
girls:
the boys they wanna have fun now
the girls they wanna have fun
the boys they wanna have fun
the girls they wanna have fun
girls:
hey now, hey now cyndi:
oh, oh, oh, oh
cyndi:
oh, oh, oh, oh what's the matter with you
cyndi:
oh, oh, oh, oh girls just wanna have fun now
come on
girls:
hey now, hey now, what's the matter with you cyndi:
oh mommy dear we're not the fortunate ones
girls:
girls just wanna have fun now come on
cyndi:
but girls they wanna have fun
girls:
come on
cyndi:
hey now, hey now
what's the matter with you
girls just wanna have
fun now
__file_terminal__
when the sun comes up on a sleepy little town
down around san antone
and the folks are rising' for another day
'round about their homes
the people of the town are strange
and they're proud of where they came
well, you're talkin' 'bout china grove
oh, china grove
well, the preacher and the teacher
lord, they're a caution
they are the talk of the town
when the gossip gets to flyin'
and they ain't lyin'
when the sun goes falling' down
they say that the father's insane
and dear mrs. perkin's a game
we're talkin' 'bout the china grove
oh, china grove
but every day there's a new thing comin'
the ways of an oriental view
the sheriff and his buddies
with their samurai swords
you can even hear the music at night
and though it's a part of the lone star state
people don't seem to care
they just keep on lookin' to the east
talkin' 'bout the china grove
oh, china grove
__file_terminal__
down around the corner
a half a mile from here
you see them old trains runnin'
and you watch them disappear
without love
where would you be now
without love
you know i saw miss lucy
down along the tracks
she lost her home and family
and she won't be comin' back
without love
where would you be now
well the illinois central
and the southern central freight
gotta keep on pushin' mama
'cause you know they're runnin' late
without love
where would you be now
now, now, now
without love
well the illinois central
and the southern central freight
gotta keep on pushin' mama
'cause you know they're runnin' late
without love
where would you be now
where pistons keep on churnin'
and the wheels go 'round and 'round
and the steel rails are cold and hard
for the miles that they go down
without love
where would you be now
oh
i got to go, go, go baby
i got to go with 'em baby now bye baby
everything's moving baby, down, down, down
gonna get you baby
everything's moving baby, down, down, down
gonna keep on moving
gonna keep on moving down
__file_terminal__
sailin' away on the crest of a wave
it's like magic
oh, rollin' and ridin' and slipping' and slidin'
it's magic
and you, and your sweet desire
you took me, ohhh higher and higher, baby
it's a livin' thing
it's a terrible thing to lose
it's a given thing
what a terrible thing to lose
making believe this is what you've conceived
from your worst day
oh, moving in line when you look back in time
to the first day
and you and your sweet desire
you took me ohh, higher and higher baby
it's a livin' thing
it's a terrible thing to lose
it's a given thing
what a terrible thing to lose
and i'm takin' a dive, ah the slide, hey
takin' a dive 'cause you can't halt the slide
floating downstream
ah, so let her go don't start spoiling the show
it's a bad dream
and you and your sweet desire
you took me
ohh, higher and higher, baby
it's a livin' thing
it's a terrible thing to lose
it's a given thing
what a terrible thing to lose
it's a livin' thing
it's a terrible thing to lose
[fade] it's a given thing
__file_terminal__
[spoken] elvis presley:
yeah, yes, uh...
i'd like to do uh my favorite christmas song which i recorded [audience cheering]
♪ i'll have a blue christmas without you
i'll be so blue just thinking about you
decorations of red on a green christmas tree
won't be the same, dear, if you're not here with me
martina mcbride:
when those blue snowflakes start falling
that's when those blue memories start calling
you'll be doing all right with your christmas of white
but i'll have a blue, blue, blue, blue christmas
elvis:
i'll have a blue christmas without you
i'll be so blue just thinking about you
martina:
you'll be doing all right with your christmas of white
both:
but i'll have a blue, blue, blue, blue christmas
__file_terminal__
i'm a real wild child
well i'm just outa school
like i'm real real cool
gotta dance like a fool
got the message that i gotta be a wild one
ooh yeah i'm a wild one
gotta break it loose
gonna keep 'em movin' wild
gonna keep a swingin' baby
i'm a real wild child
gonna meet all my friends
gonna have ourselves a ball
gonna tell my friends
gonna tell them all
that i'm a wild one
ooh yeah i'm a wild one
gotta break it loose
gonna keep 'em movin' wild
gonna keep a swingin' baby
i'm a real wild child
i'm a wild one
gotta break it loose
gonna keep 'em movin' wild
gonna keep a swingin' baby
i'm a real wild child
oh...
well, i'm a real wild one
an' i like a wild fun
in a world gone crazy
everything seems hazy
i'm a wild one
ooh yeah i'm a wild one
gotta break it loose
gonna keep 'em movin' wild
gonna keep a swingin' baby
i'm a real wild child
i'm a wild one
ooh yeah i'm a wild one
gotta break it loose
gonna keep 'em movin' wild
gonna keep a swingin' baby
i'm a real wild child
i'm a real wild chi-i-ild
i'm a wild one
ooh yeah i'm a wild one
gotta break it loose
gonna keep 'em movin' wild
gonna keep a swingin' baby
i'm a real wild chi-i-ild
i'm a wild one
ooh yeah
i'm a wild one
i'm a real, a real wild one
i'm a wild one
i'm a real wild chi-i-ild
__file_terminal__
i got my mind set on you
but it's gonna take money
a whole lotta spending money
it's gonna take plenty of money
to do it right, child
it's gonna take time
a whole lot of precious time
it's gonna take patience and time, umm
to do it, to do it, to do it, to do it, to do it
to do it right, child
i got my mind set on you
and this time i know it's for real
the feelings that i feel
i know if i put my mind to it
i know that i really can do it
i got my mind set on you
set on you
i got my mind set on you
set on you
but it's gonna take money
a whole lotta spending money
it's gonna take plenty of money
to do it right, child
it's gonna take time
a whole lot of precious time
it's gonna take patience and time, umm
to do it, to do it, to do it, to do it, to do it
to do it right
i got my mind set on you
and this time i know it's for real
the feelings that i feel
i know if i put my mind to it
i know that i really can do it
but it's gonna take money
a whole lotta spending money
it's gonna take plenty of money
to do it right, child
it's gonna take time
a whole lot of precious time
it's gonna take patience and time, umm
to do it, to do it, to do it, to do it, to do it
to do it right
set on you
__file_terminal__
love you
oh, oh
love you
oh, oh
love you
ooh, la, la, la, la, la, la
lying awake i turn to you as you are softly sleeping
i think of what i'd like to do
while you are somewhere dreaming
i, i feel so happy by your side,
oh why
i wonder, wonder, wonder why
finding it hard to find the words
to say what i am feeling
i'm so in love, i'm so alive and i know you're the reason why
why i'm so happy all the time
oh why
i wonder, wonder, wonder why
i need nothing else in life than to hold you
i, oh , i am in so deep
i don't need no sleep
just baby you and me.
baby i live for loving you
ooh, ooh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la
live for loving you
all i wanna do is love you
love you
it would never cross my mind to find another lover.
'cause after having been with you
there could be no other
i, just touching you i'm satisfied
oh why
i wonder, wonder, wonder why.
i need nothing else in life than to hold you
i, oh , i am in so deep
i don't need no sleep
i just need you here with me
baby i live for loving you
ooh, ooh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la
live for loving you
all i wanna do is love you
ha
love you
ha
love you, love you
ha
love you, love you
baby i live for loving you
ooh, ooh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la
live for loving you
all i wanna do is love you
love you
ooh, ooh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la
yes i live for loving you
baby i live for loving you
ooh, ooh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la
live for loving you
all i wanna do, all i wanna do
love you
__file_terminal__
girl, you're lookin' fine tonight
and every guy has got you in his sights
what you're doin' with a clown like me?
it's surely one of life's little mysteries
so tonight i'll ask the stars above
how did i ever win your love,
what did i do, what did i say
to turn your angel eyes my way?
well i'm the guy who never learned to dance
never even got one second glance
across a crowded room was close enough
i could look but i could never touch
tonight i'll ask the stars above
how did i ever win your love?
what did i do, what did i say
to turn your angel eyes my way?
don't anyone wake me, if it's just a dream
'cause she's the best thing that's ever happened to me
all you fellows, you can look all you like
but this girl you see, she's leavin' here with me tonight
there's just one more thing i need to know
if this is love, why does it scare me so?
must be somethin' that only you can see
because i feel it, when you look at me
tonight i'll ask the stars above
how did i ever win your love?
what did i do, what did i say
to turn your angel eyes my way?
__file_terminal__
are you ready boots?
start walkin'
you keep sayin' you got something for me
well officer i don't mind to say you do
now you're looking right where i thought you'd be looking
legs come handy when law's in front of you
these boots are made for walkin'
and that's just what they'll do
one of these days these boots are gonna walk all over you
you believe you slapped me for a reason
now i'm pretending my bending's just for fun
you keep playing where i got you playing yeah
these double 'd' initials work to run
these boots are made for walkin'
and that's just what they'll do
one of these days these boots are gonna walk all over you
i'm the girl with the good boys who don't mean you no harm
that's got a way with hazzard county charm
there ain't no crime in havin' a little fun
swerve my stride
bat my sexy eyes
where my boots at
strut ya stuff come on
hey ya'll
wanna come and see something
can't touch, can i get a hand clap for the way i work my back
tick tock all around the clock drop it
push ya tush, like that
can i get a sooey
can i get a yee haw
you keep thinkin' what you shouldn't be thinking
nothin' too far down till you kissing ground
i'm agonna send you back home as you crying
but uncle jesse he sure is gonna be proud
these boots are made for walkin'
that's just what they'll do
one of these days these boots are gonna walk all over you
these boots are made for walkin'
that's just what they'll do
one of these days these boots are gonna walk all over you
come on boots
start walking
come on ladies
hey ya'll
wanna come and see something
can't touch, can i get a hand clap for the way i work my back
tick tock all around the clock drop it
push ya tush, like that
can i get a sooey
can i get a yee haw
come on willie
yeee haw
willie nelson everybody
__file_terminal__
just a small town girl
livin' in a lonely world
she took the midnight train goin' anywhere
just a city boy
born and raised in south detroit
he took the midnight train goin' anywhere
a singer in a smokey room
the smell of wine and cheap perfume
for a smile they can share the night
it goes on and on and on come on
strangers waiting
up and down the boulevard
their shadows searching
in the night
streetlights, people
livin' just to find emotion
hidin' somewhere in the night
workin' hard to get my fill
everybody wants a thrill
payin' anything to roll the dice
just one more time
some will win some will lose
some were born to sing the blues
oh, the movie never ends
it goes on and on and on come on
strangers waiting
up and down the boulevard
their shadows searching
in the night
streetlights, people
livin' just to find emotion
hidin' somewhere in the night
don't stop believin'
hold on to that feelin'
streetlights, people
don't stop believin'
hold on
streetlights, people
don't stop believin'
hold on to that feelin'
streetlights, people
don't stop
__file_terminal__
i need a lover who'll give me
the kind of love that'll last always
i need somebody uplifting
to take me away
i want a lover who knows me
who understands how i feel inside
someone to comfort and hold me
through the long lonely nights till the dawn
why don't you take me away
dreamlover come rescue me
take me up take me down
take me anywhere you want to baby now
i need you so desperately
won't you please come around
'cause i wanna share forever with you baby
i don't want another pretender
to disillusion me one more time
whispering words of forever
playing with my mind
i need someone to hold on to
the kind of love that won't fly away
i just want someone to belong to
everyday, of my life, always
so come and take me away
dreamlover come rescue me
take me up take me down
take me anywhere you want to baby now
i need you so desperately
won't you please come around
'cause i wanna share forever with you baby
baby come and take me away
dream lover come rescue me
take me up take me down
take me anywhere you want to baby now
i need you so desperately
won't you please come around
'cause i wanna share forever with you baby
dream lover come rescue me
take me up take me down
take me anywhere you want to baby now
i need you so desperately
won't you please come around
'cause i wanna share forever with you baby
__file_terminal__
there's a hero
if you look inside your heart
you don't have to be afraid
of what you are
there's an answer
if you reach into your soul
and the sorrow that you know
will melt away
and then a hero comes along
with the strength to carry on
and you cast your fears aside
and you know you can survive
when you feel like hope is gone
look inside you and be strong
and you'll finally see the truth
that a hero lies in you
it's a long, road
when you face the world alone
no one reaches out a hand
for you to hold
you can find love
if you search within yourself
and the emptiness you felt
will disappear
and then a hero comes along
with the strength to carry on
and you cast your fears aside
and you know you can survive
when you feel like hope is gone
look inside you and be strong
and you'll finally see the truth
that a hero lies in you
lord knows
dreams are hard to follow
but don't let anyone
tear them away
just hold on
'cause there will be tomorrow
in time you'll find the way
and then a hero comes along
with the strength to carry on
and you cast your fears aside
and you know you can survive
when you feel like hope is gone
look inside you and be strong
and you'll finally see the truth
that a hero lies in you
__file_terminal__
well, i remember every little thing as if it happened only yesterday
parking by the lake and there was not another car in sight
and i never had a girl looking any better than you did
and all the kids at school, they were wishing they were me that night
and now our bodies are, oh, so close and tight
it never felt so good, it never felt so right
and we're glowing like the metal on the edge of a knife
glowing like the metal on the edge of a knife
c'mon, hold on tight
well c'mon, hold on tight
thought it's cold and lonely in the deep dark night
i can see paradise by the dashboard lights
ain't no doubt about it we were doubly blessed
'cause we were barely seventeen and we were barely dressed
ain't no doubt about it, baby, got to go and shout it
ain't no doubt about it, we were doubly blessed
'cause we were barely seventeen and we were barely dressed
baby, doncha hear my heart you got it drowning out the radio
i've been waiting so long for you to come along and have some fun
well, i gotta let you know no you're never gonna regret it
so open up your eyes, i got a big surprise, it'll feel all right
well, i wanna make your motor run
and now our bodies are, oh, so close and tight
it never felt so good, it never felt so right
and we're glowing like the metal on the edge of a knife
glowing like the metal on the edge of a knife
c'mon, hold on tight
well c'mon, hold on tight
though it's cold and lonely in the deep dark night
i can see paradise by the dashboard lights
though it's cold and lonely in the deep dark night
i can see paradise by the dashboard lights
you got to do what you can and let mother nature do the rest
ain't no doubt about it we were doubly blessed
'cause we were barely seventeen and we were barely
we're gonna go all the way tonight
we're gonna go all the way
and tonight's the night
we're gonna go all the way tonight
we're gonna go all the way
and tonight's the night
we're gonna go all the way tonight
we're gonna go all the way
and tonight's the night
we're gonna go all the way tonight
we're gonna go all the way
and tonight's the night
[spoken like a baseball announcer] okay, here we go, we got a real pressure cooker going here
two down, nobody on, no score, bottom of the ninth
there's the windup, and there it is, a line shot up the middle
look at him go, this boy can really fly, he's rounding first
and really turning it on now, he's not letting up at all
he's gonna try for second, the ball is bobbled out in center
and here comes the throw, and what a throw!
he's gonna slide in head first, here he comes
he's out!
no, wait, safe, safe at second base
this kid really makes things happen out there
batter steps up to the plate, here's the pitch
he's going, and what a jump he's got!
he's trying for third, here's the throw
it's in the dirt-safe at third!
holy cow, stolen base!
he's taking a pretty big lead out there
almost daring him to try and pick him off
the pitcher glances over, winds up, and it's bunted
bunted down the third base line
the suicide squeeze is on
here he comes, squeeze play, it's gonna be close
here's the throw, here's the play at the plate
holy cow, i think he's gonna make it
stop right there!
i gotta know right now
before we go any further do you love me?
will you love me forever?
do you need me?
will you never leave me?
will you make me so happy for the rest of my life?
will you take me away and will you make me your wife?
do you love me?
will you love me forever?
do you need me?
will you never leave me?
will you make me happy for the rest of my life?
will you take me away and will you make me your wife?
i gotta know right now before we go any further
do you love me?
will you love me forever?
let me sleep on it, baby, baby, let me sleep on it
let me sleep on it and i'll give you an answer in the morning
let me sleep on it, baby, baby, let me sleep on it
let me sleep on it and i'll give you an answer in the morning
let me sleep on it, baby, baby, let me sleep on it
let me sleep on it and i'll give you an answer in the morning
i gotta know right now, do you love me?
will you love me forever?
do you need me?
will you never leave me?
will you make me so happy for the rest of my life?
will you take me away and will you make me your wife?
i gotta know right now before we go any further
do you love me?
and will you love me forever?
what's it gonna be, boy?
come on
i can wait all night
what's it gonna be, boy?
yes or no
what's it gonna be, boy?
yes
or
no
let me sleep on it, baby, baby, let me sleep on it
well, let me sleep on it, i'll give you an answer in the morning
i gotta know right now, do you love me?
will you love me forever?
do you need me?
let me sleep on it
will you never leave me?
baby, baby let me sleep on it
will you make me so happy for the rest of my life?
let me sleep on it
will you take me away and will you make me your wife?
i'll give you an answer in the morning
i gotta know right now before we go any further
do you love me?
will you love me forever?
let me sleep on it
will you love me forever?
let me sleep on it
will you love me forever?
praying for the end of time, lord, i was crazed
and when the feeling came upon me like a tidal wave
i started swearing to my god and on my mother's grave
that i would love you to the end of time
i swore that i would love you to the end of time
so now i'm praying for the end of time
to hurry up and arrive
'cause if i gotta spend another minute with you
i don't think that i can really survive
i'll never break my promise or forget my vow
but god only knows what i can do right now
i'm praying for the end of time, it's all that i can do
praying for the end of time so i can end my time with you
it was long ago and it was far away
and it was so much better than it is today
[repeat and fade] it was long ago and it was far away and it was so much better than it is today
__file_terminal__
baby cried the day the circus came to town
'cause she didn't want parades just passin' by her
so she painted on a smile and took up with some clown
while she danced without a net upon the wire
i know a lot about 'er
'cause you see
baby is an awful lot like me
don't cry out loud
just keep it inside and learn how to hide your feelings
fly high and proud
and if you should fall remember you almost had it all
baby saw that when they pulled that big top down
they left behind her dreams among the litter
and the different kind of love she thought she'd found
there was nothin' left but sawdust and some glitter
but baby can't be broken
'cause you see
she had the finest teacher
that was me
i told 'er
don't cry out loud
just keep it inside and learn how to hide your feelings
fly high and proud
and if you should fall remember you almost had it all
don't cry out loud
just keep it inside and learn how to hide your feelings
fly high and proud
and if you should fall remember you almost made it
don't cry out loud
just keep it inside and learn how to hide your feelings
fly high and proud
and if you should fall remember you almost had it all
man :
that's melissa manchester, please stay tuned.
__file_terminal__
[biz markie beatboxing]
[big daddy kane rapping] ladies and gentlemen check this out
a spectacular event in rhymin'
it might seem insane but the big daddy kane
is rockin' the house with paul simon and my man biz mark down in the park even spud webb plays a cool part
in the video, me and julio
down by the schoolyard
the mama pajama rolled out of bed, and she ran to the police station
when the papa found out, he began to shout, and he started the investigation
it's against the law, it was against the law
what the mama saw, it was against the law.
the mama looked down and spit on the ground ev'ry time my name gets mentioned
the papa say "oy, if i get that boy
i'm gonna stick him in the house of detention.
well i'm on my way, i don't know where i'm goin',
i'm on my way, i'm takin' my time, but i don't know where.
goodbye to rosie, the queen of corona
see you, me and julio down by the schoolyard
in a couple of days they come and take me away
but the press let the story leak
and when the radical priest come to get me released
we's all on the cover of newsweek
well, i'm on my way, i don't know where i'm goin'
i'm on my way, i'm takin' my time, but i don't know where
goodbye to rosie, the queen of corona
see you, me and julio down by the schoolyard
[john madden] hey, hey guys!
come here.
[john madden continues to talk plays]
__file_terminal__
i met my old lover
on the street last night
she seemed so glad to see me
i just smiled she seemed so glad to see me
and we talked about some old times
and we drank ourselves some beers
still crazy after all these years
i'm not the kind of man
who tends to socialize
i seem to lean on old familiar ways
and i ain't no fool for love songs
that whisper in my ears
still crazy after all these years
four in the morning
crapped out
yawning
longing my life away
i'll never worry
why should i?
i know it's all gonna fade away
now i sit by my window
and i watch the cars
i fear i'll do some damage
one fine day
but i would not be convicted
by a jury of my peers
still crazy after all these years
oh still crazy
still crazy
still crazy after all these years
__file_terminal__
it might seem crazy what i'm about to say
sunshine she's here, you can take a break
i'm a hot air balloon that could go to space
with the air, like i don't care baby by the way
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like a room without a roof
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth
because i'm happy
clap along if you know what happiness is to you
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like that's what you want to do
here come bad news talking this and that
well, give me all you got, and don't hold it back
well, i should probably warn you i'll be just fine
no offense to you, don't waste your time
here's why
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like a room without a roof
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth
because i'm happy
clap along if you know what happiness is to you
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like that's what you want to do
hey, come on
bring me down
can't nothing bring me down
my level's too high
bring me down
can't nothing bring me down
i said
bring me down
can't nothing bring me down
my level's too high
bring me down
can't nothing bring me down i said
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like a room without a roof
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth
because i'm happy
clap along if you know what happiness is to you
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like that's what you want to do
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like a room without a roof
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth
because i'm happy
clap along if you know what happiness is to you
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like that's what you want to do
bring me down... can't nothing...
bring me down... my level's too high...
bring me down... can't nothing...
bring me down, i said
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like a room without a roof
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth
because i'm happy
clap along if you know what happiness is to you
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like that's what you want to do
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like a room without a roof
because i'm happy
clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth
because i'm happy
clap along if you know what happiness is to you
hey...
clap along if you feel like that's what you want to do
come on
__file_terminal__
i'm comin' up so you better get this party started
get this party started on a saturday night
everybody's waitin' for me to arrive
sendin' out the message to all of my friends
we'll be lookin' flashy in my mercedes benz
i got lotsa style, got my gold diamond rings
i can go for miles if you know what i mean
i'm comin' up so you better get this party started
pumpin up the volume, breakin down' to the beat
cruisin' through the west side
we'll be checkin' the scene
boulevard is freakin' as i'm comin' up fast
i'll be burnin' rubber, you'll be kissin' my ass
pull up to the bumper, get out of the car
license plate says stunner number 1 superstar
i'm comin' up so you better get this party started
makin' my connection as i enter the room
everybody's chillin' as i set up the groove
pumpin' up the volume with this brand new beat
everybody's dancin' and they're dancin' for me
i'm your operator, you can call anytime
i'll be your connection to the party line
i'm comin' up so you better get this party started
get this party started
get this party started right now
get this party started
get this party started right now
__file_terminal__
please don't come around
talkin' bout that you love me
cause that love shit just ain't for me
i don't wanna hear that you adore me
and i know that all you're doing is running your mind games
don't you know that game beats game
so your best bet is to be straight with me
so you say you wanna talk, let's talk
if you won't talk i'll walk, yeah it's like that
got a new man, he's waiting out back
now what!
whatcha' think about that
now when i say i'm through i'm through
basically i'm through with you
whatcha' wanna say
had to have it your way, had to play games
now you're begging me to stay
there u go, lookin' pitiful
just because i let you go
there u go, talkin' bout you want me back
but sometimes it be's like that, so
there u go, talkin' bout you miss me so
that you love me so
why i let you go
yeah you know cause your lies got old
look at you go, there u go
don't come talkin' bout how you changed
how you said goodbye to what's her name
all it sounds like to me is new game
and i was right
when i thought i'd be much better off without you
had to get myself from round you
cause my life was all about you
so you say you wanna talk, i don't
say you wanna change, i won't
yeah it's like that
had your chance, won't take you back
now what!
whatcha' think about that [phone rings]
[spoken] i thought i told you not to call
[spoken] is that bitch still with you?
[spoken] no, she's gone, she's out of my life
[spoken] well i'm busy, what do you want?
[spoken] ah, stupid carb's busted
[spoken] can i bum a ride?
[spoken] still don't have a ride?
[spoken] alright, i'll pick you up
when i say i'm through, i'm through
basically i'm through with you
whatcha' wanna say
had to have it your way, had to play games
now you're begging me to stay
there u go, lookin' pitiful
just because i let you go
there u go, talkin' bout you want me back
but sometimes it be's like that, so
there u go, talkin' bout you miss me so
that you love me so
why i let you go
yeah you know cause your lies got old
look at you, there u go
oooh, don't you wish you could turn the hands of time
don't you wish that you still were mine
don't you wish i'd take you back
don't you wish that things were simple like that
oh, didn't miss a good thing til' it's gone
but i knew it wouldn't be long
til' you came running back, missing my love
yeah, there you go
[spoken] mike's improvement room
[spoken] hello?
__file_terminal__
baby i knew at once that you were meant for me
deep in my soul
i know that i'm your destiny
though you're unsure
why fight the tide
don't think so much
let your heart decide
oh, baby i see your future and it's tied to mine
i look in your eyes and see you searching for a sign
but you'll never fall
til you let go
don't be so scared
of what you don't know
true to your heart you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
someone you know is on your side can set you free
i can do that for you if you believe in me
why second-guess
what feels so right
just trust your heart
and you'll see the light
true to your heart you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
your heart knows what's good for you
let your heart show you the way
it'll see you through ohh
boy, my heart is driving me to where you are
you can take both hands off the wheel and still get far
be swept away
enjoy the ride
you won't get lost
with your heart to guide you
true to your heart you must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
true to your heart
you must be true to your heart
true to your heart
you must be true to your heart
true to your heart
your must be true to your heart
that's when the heavens will part
and baby shower you with my love
open your eyes
your heart can tell you no lies
and when you're true to your heart
i know it's gonna lead you straight to me
__file_terminal__
la reina de la noche la diosa del vudu she's into superstitions black cats and voodoo dolls.
yo no podre salvarme podras salvarte tu i feel a premonition that girl's gonna make me fall.
la tela de la arana, la una del dragon she's into new sensations new kicks in the candle light.
te lleva a los infiernos ella es tu adiccion she's got a new addiction for every day and night.
te besa y te desnudo con tu baile demencial she'll make you take your clothes off and go dancing in the rain.
tu cierras los ojitos y te dejas arrastrar she'll make you live her crazy life but she'll take away your pain
tu te dejas arrastrar like a bullet to your brain.
come on!
ella que sera, vive la vida loca upside, inside out she's livin' the crazy life
y te dolera, si de verdad te toca she'll push and pull you down, her skin's the color mocha
ella es tu final, vive la vida loca her lips are devil red, livin' the crazy life
ella te dira, vive la vida loca she will wear you out livin' the crazy life
vive la vida loca livin' the crazy life
se fue a new york city, a la torre de un hotel woke up in new york city in a funky cheap hotel
te ha robado la cartera she took my heart and she took my money
se ha llevado hasta tu piel she must've slipped me a sleeping pill
por eso no bebia de tu copa de licor she never drinks the water and makes you order french champagne
por eso te besabe con narcotico sabor once you've had a taste of her you'll never be the same
es el beso de calor yeah, she'll make you go insane.
ella que sera vive la vida loca upside, inside out she's livin' the crazy life
y te dolera, si de verdad te toca she'll push and pull you down, her skin's the color mocha
ella es tu final, vive la vida loca her lips are devil red, livin' the crazy life
ella te dira, vive la vida loca she will wear you out livin' the crazy life
vive la vida loca livin' the crazy life
te besa y te desnuda con su baile demencial she'll make you take your clothes off and go dancing in the rain.
tu cierras los ojitos y te dejas arrastrar she'll make you live her crazy life
tu te dejas arrastrar but she'll take away your pain like a bullet to your brain
ella que sera, vive la vida loca upside, inside out she's livin' the crazy life
y te dolera, si de verdad te toca she'll push and pull you down, her skin's the color mocha
ella es tu final, vive la vida loca her lips are devil red, livin' the crazy life
ella te dira, vive la vida loca she will wear you out livin' the crazy life
vive la vida loca livin' the crazy life
vive la vida loca livin' la vida loca.
__file_terminal__
i would have given you all of my heart
but there's someone who's torn it apart
and she's taken just all that i had
but if you want i'll try to love again
baby i'll try to love again but i know
the first cut is the deepest
audience:
baby i know rod: the first cut is the deepest
but when it come to being lucky she's cursed
when it come to loving me she's the worst
i still want you by my side
just to help me dry the tears that i've cried
and i'm sure going to give you a try
and if you want i'll try to love again
baby i'll try to love again but i know
the first cut is the deepest
audience:
baby i know rod: the first cut is the deepest
but when it come to being lucky she's cursed
when it come to loving me she's the worst
i still want you by my side
just to help me dry the tears that i've cried
but i'm sure gonna give you a try 'cause if you want i'll try to love again
baby i'll try to love again but i know
rod:
the first audience: cut is the deepest
audience:
baby i know all: the first cut is the deepest
when it come to being lucky she's cursed
when it come to loving me she's the worst
__file_terminal__
i will remember you
will you remember me?
don't let your life pass you by
weep not for the memories
i'm so tired but i can't sleep
standin' on the edge of something much too deep
it's funny how we feel so much but we cannot say a word
we are screaming inside but we can't be heard
i will remember you
will you remember me?
don't let your life pass you by
weep not for the memories
i'm so afraid to love you but more afraid to lose
clinging to a past that doesn't let me choose
once there was a dark, deep and endless night
you gave me everything you had oh you gave me light
and i will remember you
will you remember me?
don't let your life pass you by
weep not for the memories
i will remember you
will you remember me?
don't let your life pass you by
weep not for the memories
__file_terminal__
lala lala la lala
hah aaa aaa
aah aaa aaa
don't leave me in all this pain
don't leave me out in the rain
come back and bring back my smile
come and take these tears away
i need your arms to hold me now
the nights are so unkind
bring back those nights when i held you beside me
unbreak my heart
say you'll love me again
undo this hurt you caused
when you walked out the door
and walked outta my life
uncry these tears
i cried so many nights
unbreak my heart
my heart
take back that sad word goodbye
bring back the joy to my life
don't leave me here with these tears
come and kiss this pain away
i can't forget the day you left
time is so unkind
and life is so cruel without you here beside me
unbreak my heart
say you'll love me again
undo this hurt you caused
when you walked out the door
and walked outta my life
uncry these tears
i cried so many nights
unbreak my heart
don't leave me in all this pain
don't leave me out in the rain
bring back the nights when i held you beside me
unbreak my heart
say you'll love me again
undo this hurt you caused
when you walked out the door
and walked outta my life
uncry these tears
i cried so many, many nights
oh, unbreak my
unbreak my heart, oh baby
come back and say you love me
unbreak my heart, sweet darlin'
without you i just can't go on
say that you love
oh
[repeat and fade]
__file_terminal__
if i should stay
i would only be in your way
so i'll go but i know
i'll think of you every step of the way
and i will always love you
i will always love you
you
my darling, you
bittersweet memories
that is all i'm taking with me
so good-bye
please don't cry
we both know i'm not what you, you need
and i will always love you
i will always love you
you
i hope life treats you kind
and i hope you have all you've dreamed of
and i'm wishing you joy and happiness
but above all this i wish you love
and i will always love you
i will always love you
i, i will always love you
you
darling, i love you
i'll always
i'll always love you
__file_terminal__
♪ unit patrol, unit patrol ♪
♪ they're back on the beat to make crime disappear ♪
♪ beefy disguises from ground-up steer ♪
♪ a sherlock holmes with laser-beam eyes ♪
♪ your own private dick ♪
♪ unit patrol, unit patrol ♪
frylock:
ready!
♪ unit patrol, unit patrol ♪
shake: :
wider.
♪ crime doesn't pay ♪
♪ unless you get away ♪
♪ but you won't ♪
♪ 'cause you can't from the aqua unit patrol squad one ♪
announcer:
tonight's episode -- "jumpy george.
shake:
hey, man!
slap me some skin, brother!
carl:
no, i'm not gonna do that.
shake:
come on, let's seal the deal, baby!
carl:
no.
shake:
on the paw!
carl:
no, i seen you put the freaking thing on.
i'm not doing it.
shake:
shake it.
carl:
i'll shake your other hand.
i'm not gonna shake that hand.
shake:
this one.
shake hands with this one.
carl:
no, i'm not doing it.
shake:
when you least expect it, you're getting the whammy.
carl:
look, i ain't gonna trifle with no cheap dollar store crap, all right?
i invested in some serious technology here.
check it out.
x-ray goggles.
shake:
give them to me!
you don't whip those out until you spot the major boobage.
and taco.
'cause taco is king.
carl:
what's that?
is that a broad?
shake:
hey, i noticed you don't have any rings on your finger!
whoo!
carl:
hey, i noticed you ain't got no rings on your finger.
shake:
hey, babe.
you look like a milf i'd love to meet.
carl:
hey, you seem single.
what's your name?
i'm interested in your and your things, the things you say.
[ hiss!
aah!
shake:
carl, your cologne!
carl:
he's lying!
he sprayed me with fart spray!
shake:
he who smelt it dealt it!
what are you doing this weekend?
carl:
yeah, or tonight.
shake:
what about this afternoon?
carl:
or right now?
i'm good to go right now.
let's do this.
shake:
carl, please.
you smell like farts.
carl:
you spray me again, so help me god, i'll break every freaking yellow finger in your hand in front of this beautiful broad and her two kids.
i really want to know their names, too.
i'm way into kids.
shake:
i'll play catch with them right now.
[ children scream ]
good catch!
carl:
she don't want to date no drink cup!
shake:
she will when she gets to know me.
i'm deep, i'm successful, and i'm a tornado in the sack.
guys.
guys, please.
i'll be happy to go out with both of you.
unfortunately, i don't have a babysitter.
meatwad:
you want me to do what to who now?
shake:
it's a paying gig!
now you're complaining?
fine.
i'll get somebody else.
meatwad:
fine.
you do that.
shake:
okay, fine.
you called my bluff.
but that is the last time that will ever happen, or santa claus will burn all your toys.
meatwad:
you're bluffing.
you ain't bluffing.
santa claus will burn my toys!
shake:
what can i do?
far away in the north pole, santa is just clicking a lighter to his gas-soaked toys.
meatwad:
c-call the elves.
the elves know.
th-- they know i did good down here!
shake:
not good enough.
not until you make this right with both me and with father christmas.
frylock:
make what right, shake?
shake:
oh, hey, man!
give me five, up top!
frylock:
i can see the hand buzzer, man.
shake:
you told him, you judas!
meatwad:
hey, frylock, i'm babysitting tonight, or
santa claus is gonna burn all my toys down.
frylock:
meatwad, santa claus would never burn all your toys, because santa claus doesn't exist.
meatwad:
he what?
shake:
then how do you explain all the cookies he eats, huh?
meatwad:
yeah!
how you explain that?
frylock:
well, i
i haven't figured out how the cookies disappear, okay?
shake:
then don't pop off about things you don't even know about.
meatwad:
i thought i was gonna have to call 911.
shake:
and we don't have a phone, do we?
do we, out-of-work scientist?
you need to have them bathed and in their p.j.s by 7:00.
meatwad:
okay.
make sure you brush their teeth and read their favorite book.
they'll pick them out.
they love books.
and brush her hair out.
it gets tangled.
meatwad:
okay.
i'll do that.
and they can watch tv, but only a half an hour and only cartoons.
so that means no cartoon network.
and i should be back by 11:00.
meatwad:
allright.
everybody, get your shoes on.
we're gonna go to dinner and a movie with these people that we've been talking to.
shake:
no,youdumbass!
i mean
i mean "dumb heinie.
did you not just hear all those...
things you need to do?
carl:
whoa,whoa,whoa,whoa .
backtrack.
you said something about returning at 11:00, but the way
i had it worked out in my mind, that's about the time when i got both of my hands deep in your bra, kneading your chest like pizza dough.
shake:
uh,she'ssleeping with me tonight, carl.
carl:
yeah,right.
on the floor in the hallway?
shake:
yeah.
away from the puddles of his urine.
meatwad:
i don'tdo that.
shake:
i knowyoudothat .
meatwad:
i doit sometimes.
don'tleave,mommy!
don'tgo.
i don't like this babysitter!
shake:
getthe...
out of my way or i'm gonna put a hole in you so big
i'm sorry.
i'm just a little excited about the big night ahead of us.
let's take my car.
hey, carl, can i borrow your car?
carl:
no,idon 'tthinkso.
we're driving my car.
but there's only room for two.
so someone may have to ride in the trunk.
shake:
yeah.
and that's you, right?
i mean, it's our date.
carl:
it'sgonnabeyou, cup.
shake:
fine.
what about this?
would you possibly mind riding in the trunk?
carl:
shake!
hey!
shake:
justuntilwe get to the hoagie shop.
carl:
hey!
i ain't having my date ride in the trunk!
unless she wants to.
there is a lot of leg room back there.
you know, once you take out the spare and the subwoofer.
you think about it.
but we are at the curb now.
meatwad:
hmm.
i'm gonna stay in here for five more minutes.
and i need to conduct a space battle in here, but after that, it's bedtime.
[ imitates laser fire ]
you know, i ain't playing around.
i am playing around, yes, with space toys, but i'm not playing around when it comes to bedtime.
we'renotherchildren.
we'rebodyguards.
inanintergalactic witness protection program.
and that mommy... [ distorted ] ...
is actually in our custody.
meatwad:
andi'mthe king wookie, and this here's my bubble gun.
[ imitates laser fire ]
youthinki'm[bleep] around with you, huh?
meatwad:
it'sokay,sweetie, 'cause your mama, she's in very good hands.
carl:
aah!
can't believe you forgot to bring the freaking coupon!
shake:
i don'tcutthings out just 'cause you say so!
47,food'sup .
shake:
besides, our food's here!
where's our date?
wow.
this is embarrassing, but can we borrow $15.92?
carl:
well,igot chips,too.
so we need money for those, too.
but, uh, i'll pay you back later with my world-famous chest massage.
[ laughs ]
you hear me?
wake up.
shake:
hey,wakeup.
wake up!
what did i tell you?
poke holes in the trunk.
carl:
digaroundinher purse there for a $20.
i mean, those guys are still waiting at the cash register for us.
shake:
youdo it .
carl:
whatthehellisthat?
what are you doing?
shake:
rosepetals.
i'm building a little bridge to...
town.
carl:
allright,look.
i got diarrhea, bad.
but you don't make no seduction moves with my date while i'm gone.
i got my eye on you.
[ door opens, bell jingles ]
[ door closes ]
shake:
wakeup ,my lady.
mightn't i help you out of your chariot so you might have the pleasure of watching me shove this steak knife into this jackass' tire?
[ grunting ]
i'll get it.
hold on.
[ grunting ]
[ beeping ]
ignignokt:
wevaporizeher , and those parking tickets disappear.
err:
okay,man.
comeon.
[distorted]we need to go get her.
meatwad:
okay,butremember, now, we all need to brush our teeth first.
we'llbebrushingour teeth with your blood if we don't get out of here now.
meatwad:
no.
your mama said that y'all need to read me some books and comb my hair to keep it tangled, 'cause i'm supposed to be in bed by 8:00.
you'retheworst[bleep]
babysitter we ever had!
heinierockets,go !
[ both farting ]
meatwad:
seeyoulater,then .
i mean -- wait.
can i stay up and watch some tv?
carl:
look,i'mlayingall my cards on the table here.
i want us to have an honest relationship right off the bat.
i couldn't help but notice that you got kids.
how tight are you?
shake:
carl,thatis inappropriate, as is the diarrhea on the back of your shirt.
carl:
i mustapologize.
it was like i sat down on a flamethrower back there, you know?
you can relate.
and you need to stock your bathroom better!
i had to run out here with my pants around my ankles and grab some napkins!
oh,mygod.
[ beep, beep ]
it's them.
[ siren chirps ]
ignignokt:
there'smy parking space right there, on top of that other vehicle in a parking space.
we park anywhere we want.
err:
i 'mhandicapped,man!
'cause i'm drunk.
[ laughs ]
ignignokt:
andyoucan 'tdo one single thing about it.
[ camera shutter clicking ]
[ thud ]
err:
man,youtoldthat pig off and that bitch and that judge and that guy in the jail that raped you!
ignignokt:
theyallknowwhere to go and how to eat it now.
i've told them where their dinner is and what it is.
itestifiedagainstthem.
witness protection sent me here.
err:
andwe followedyou !
ignignokt:
hurry,err.
vaporize him.
err:
i toldyou,man ,thisis as freaking fast as it goes.
it is a vaporizer.
carl:
hey!
i'm having an intimate, romantic evening over here.
so you pipe it down or i'll pipe down your face!
ignignokt:
howaboutan appetizer -- one fresh bird, fat boy, straight up.
meatwad:
hey,y'all,i've come here to tell u that i put your kids to bed at 8:00, just like you said.
youleftthemathome ?
meatwad:
well,no .
of course not.
i wouldn't do that.
i let them come with me.
hey,mommy.
hey,mom.
meatwad:
i 'mjusttellingyou a lie so i don't get in no trouble.
setheinielaserstokill .
[ both fart ]
[ beep, beep, beep, beep ]
okay.
weshouldgo.
well, i've had a really nice time tonight.
carl:
sowhichone ofyou pushed a steak knife through my back tire, huh?
shake:
i don'tknow.
i guess you'd better go take care of that.
me and my lady are taking the bus to bangville, a.k.a. the hot, rashy astroturf in my rented flat.
carl:
hedon't care about you!
i'm the one that loves you and imagines you riding me!
iwishicouldstay with both of you, but i'm sorry.
the truth is, i'm molting for the next three days.
plus, my vagina would destroy you, and i sweat acid.
[ roars ]
[ whoosh ]
shake:
whatdidyou say to her to make her leave?
carl:
i don'tknow.
i stopped paying attention, like, two hours ago.
all i heard was, "blah, blah, blah, period.
i'm on my period.
shake:
juston andon and on and gababababa!
carl:
blipblopblippitydoo!
shake:
god.
i try to say one lie about myself and my fake achievements, and it's like i'm talking to a wall.
carl:
they'realllikethat .
they're all like, "now that dinner's paid for, i got to go.
my shell has broken open, and now i got to go to another galaxy.
freaking molting bitches.
[ thudding ]
[ rattle ]
shake:
look,i'msorryilet some stupid broad get in between you and me and us both getting some with her.
carl:
i 'msorry,too.
i'm gonna go inside, fire up the computer, and rub one out.
pop a coldie and then rub a second smaller one out.
if i have enough.
shake:
yeah,me too.
[ door closes ]
how would one go about doing that, exactly?
i mean, i know.
[ laughs ]
ah, it's just a friend of mine was...
curious.
__file_terminal__
♪ unit patrol, unit patrol ♪
♪ they're back on the beat to make crime disappear ♪
♪ beefy disguises from ground-up steer ♪
♪ a sherlock holmes with laser-beam eyes ♪
♪ your own private dick ♪
♪ unit patrol, unit patrol ♪
ready!
♪ unit patrol, unit patrol ♪
wider.
♪ crime doesn't pay ♪
♪ unless you get away ♪
♪ but you won't ♪
♪ 'cause you can't from the aqua unit patrol squad one ♪
tonight's episode -- "lasagna.
oh, yeah, yeah, you know, i-i fantasize about, uh, just walking in there with a gun.
and if he asks me to fax one more thing, i will fax his head to
jesus on the back of a hollow-point.
hmm.
interesting, nick.
yeah, i feel pretty good.
i don't know why i have to be here.
carl, you seem to be waving your hands.
thit" and what?
uh... he's trying to say he doesn't agree with you.
thank you!
carl, there's absolutely no reason to get angry in anger-management class.
you have to be here anyway.
so let's, uh, enjoy ourselves.
let's get involved.
oh, man!
what a coincidence!
was her name cherries jubilee?
i got news for you, man -- it's a fake name.
yeah.
no.
she's jewish.
she bit me, too!
but thanks to tongue alive, i can finally say "see shells syphilis down by the seashore"!
it brought my tongue back ine"!
two weeks, or most of your money back.
i am -- extremely cool!
thanks to kool kreem.l!
apply thrice daily and see instant results.
yeah, i saw the scram necklace.
it sounds to me like you need to use some kool kreem.
come on, man!
let's blow this taco stand!
i'll show you all the cool moves -- with kool kreem!
scam wow!
this house is amazing!
hey.
did i do it right?
yeah, why don't you come and get me?
whoops!
oh, hold on.
i got him right here.
he wants to talk to you.
he wants to talk to you again.
i could do this all day.
i bet you will.
stay off the streets, now, sweetie.
let it go, big man!
that's what anger management's all about.
now, check this out!
t!
they're just my new roto-sole outdoor sneaker wear.
they cut the grass while you stand and they absorb your foot sweat and you can drink it when you get hot.
and if you order now, you can get a second pair plus one pest-e-sock.
it's a sock filled with poison.
it keeps all the roaches out of your shoes, your feet, and your house.
order now.
nothing, man.
i just thought you might be into some lawn-mowing shoes.
i have a hard time shutting up about work.
that's what my other self tells me.
but never mind that.
let's get that drink!
how about some of my filtered foot sweat?
how about scam wow?
mmm!
what you cooking?
ooh!
lasagna!
quattro formaggio!
like-a mama used to make!
hell, i didn't know you could cook.
yeah, for special occasions.
uh, why are you drilling a hole in the pan?
the cheese needs to breathe.
come on, fat boy!
look what's cooking!
scam wow!
that's some serious lasagna!
hey, carl.
good afternoon.
i just brought some lasagna for you!
i just thought you'd maybe want to take a little brisk walk.
i mean, there are four kinds of cheese in there.
don't let it get cold.
uh-oh.
carl, look at this!
the ants are starting to run off with it!
wow.
i just
i intercepted it myself.
you know, from the ants.
oh.
that's too bad.
i guess i'll just...
toss this down the sewer in front of you.
hmm.
this probably was the best batch i ever made.
oh.
you didn't -- you didn't want any of this, did you?
then let's see if you've got the legs for it.
go!
ohh!
so close to marinara town!
well, i'll see you in the fall, fats!
look, carl, you know you're gonna get shammed.
you got to strategize.
it's like dealing with girls.
you see a pretty girl you like, you ain't gonna get her unless you pounce on it.
then you got to play it like a cool customer, and after time, it'll come to you and ask you to pay for it.
but if you don't pay, it'll bite your tongue off.
i'll show you how to roll, man.
call your friend back.
oh.
hungry, huh?
hmm...
you want some pasta?
first of all, this is incredibly cruel.
i am incredibly bored.
you told me to follow my dreams.
well, this is it, man!
this is my dream!
second, when did you ever learn how to make homemade lasagna?
when i was in new york.
when were you ever in new york?
food!
frylock, he got food in there -- real food!
we've been eating dog food.
yeah.
i've seen you.
from that dumb mutt across the street?
you said those were bacon croutons!
yeah.
occasionally, i will raid his pan, yes.
come-a to mama mia!
just-a like-a back in the old country!
ignoreit,bigman !
you don't need that!
now, that's italian.
scamwow!
i'mproudofyou!
w gonoo the roof!
hmm.
that's impossible.
everyone craves my four-cheese lasagna.
i ain't never had cheese what come from a cow.
i got cheese what come from a can.
and that ain't cheese, y'all.
that is hair spray.
the only cheese you'll get is nacho cheese, which is
italian for "not your cheese.
in-a your face!
dang.
i want to learn italian.
he ain't coming, shake.
he finally figured it out, man.
every time he goes for the lasagna, he knows you're gonna pull that string.
not every time.
there is that time when i don't pull it.
but most times.
yeah, most times.
that's impossible, carl.
no one breaks every bone in their body.
you just got to believe in yourself.
you can do this!
and i can watch it!
hey!
oh!
carl, are you okay?
we got to get him to a hospital!
we've really got to get him to a hospital!
take off the damn necklace, man, before you kill him!
you're not a doctor!
i'm taking him to the hospital!
okay, maybe we're not gonna make it to the hospital.
dude!
you broke every bone in your body!
that's insane!
you're in luck!
because i've got uni-bone!
drink one nutritional shake every three to five minutes, and your skeleton will heal as good as new.
for fractures!
for breaks!
for sprains!
for twists!
for tears!
the bone-a-nizer is the only solution.
and if you act now, i'll throw in a free pair of roto-shoes.
mow your lawn while your skeleton heals.
dude!
the accusations are flying in here!
how about i brew you up a cup of insta-bone regena-bone bonernizer?
scam wow!
it appears that your bones have merged into, what we call in the medical community, one large, hideous super bone.
that makes sense.
ah!
so, is there some sort of nutritional shake that i can drink to counteract this whole thing?
well, first off, i would stop drinking any milkshake that claims to be medicine.
i'm supposed to drink these every three to five minutes.
you know, they're fat-free, and they're good for fractures, breaks, sprains, what have you, you know.
what's this?
carl, now, i know you know better than that.
i know.
probably burn the roof of my mouth, right?
smells pretty good, though, don't it?
yeah, you need to leave that lasagna alone, man.
get back here.
all right, i'll see ya.
you get back here!
get that noodle, noodle brain," said the spider to the fly.
the milkshake is really good.
__file_terminal__
naked's what i call my way of cooking.
what i cook in the restaurant isn't what i cook at home.
cooking's gotta be a laugh.
it's gotta be simple
it's gotta be tasty - it's gotta be fun.
i suppose you could say it's stripping down the recipe to its bare essentials.
no way - it's not me it's the food.
you're early - what's this - the element of surprise - come in have a cup of tea.
what are you up to today jamie?
well i've got my uncle alan coming round - and he's bringing all my cousins with him, and he's popping off to the boat show, so i'm sort of left baby-sitting so i've gotta keep them amused - er
but they're gonna come back later and i'm gonna cook them some dinner so i wanna make a - we're gonna have a bit of a pasta feast - and i'm gonna make two different types of ravioli
and a thing called semi freddo which is pretty much like ice cream but a bit more funky.
so i'm gonna go and see my mate patricia who's got a really nice cheese shop cos the pasta's got quite a bit of cheese in it and she always really looks after me, so i'd better get cracking really - i've gotta get dressed
i'm gonna knock up a bit of lunch before i go out and er - get on with the day.
right i'm gonna make this really fantastic spaghetti dish - it's like a real good munchie kind of lunchie snackie kind of thing.
let me show you how to do it.
i'm gonna make the pangrattato - and we're gonna sprinkle it on top of the pasta afterwards and it's gonna give it a really, really pucker texture.
what it is is crispy bread crumbs - you can use fresh bread if you want but i personally - it's not as good really cos you have to fight for longer then - but er - dried stuff is idea.
so just cut most of the crust off - don't be too worried about it.
you can rip it up - chop it up - do what you like but i'm just gonna whiz it - whiz it in here.
just pulse this right
and get some olive oil and get it like a four or five second lug - about four tablespoons.
oil's getting hot - couple of cloves of garlic - just to flavour the oil - by the time they're coloured we'll be ready to put our bread crumbs in.
so anyway - we need some thyme now.
you can get it everywhere.
just pick it at the end here - right and just whoop down like that - and it's really tasty - you know it's a really kind of earthy kind of herb.
doesn't matter what you do with thyme - if you put it into oil it always spits so be careful, but it's not the end of the world.
right - now these are in - put your bread crumbs in - stir them about a bit and this is - this is really quick - this takes about a minute to get really crispy.
you can see all that's getting nice and golden now.
i'd say this is just about perfect.
the littler bits are dead crispy and the bigger bits are quite chewy and that's - you know that's a nice thing.
that gives character.
so that's - that's hot.
leave that to cool down.
right - so what i need to do now
i'm gonna cook the pasta and make the sauce.
water's boiling.
right for this sauce i'm gonna show you how simple it is.
all it is is anchovies
i've got - i've got some dried chillies here - a lemon and what else do we need?
i need garlic.
couple of tablespoons of olive oil.
put your garlic in.
and just fire off the garlic - not until brown or anything - but just so it softens up.
these particular chillies are just fresh ones that i've dried at home and they're not that - they're not really that strong.
about five anchovies.
jiggle it around a bit.
then all you do is just get a nice lemon - i've taken most of the pips out.
funnily enough it's the lemon that makes it work cos i never kind anchovies but you don't - when they melt away they don't really taste like that.
you get the lovely heat from the chillie - right just check this pasta again - yeah looks pretty well.
mmm - perfect.
right
i'm gonna drain this - and then when it's still steaming hot put it into that sauce.
and you just swill it about and take it off the heat now
i'll turn the gas off.
and like that's all coated in like all the sauce - it's shiny and it's just really tasty.
so just whack it in a bowl.
no mucking about - scrap out all the juice.
get all these crispy bits and just er - look at that - oooh...
you know that tastes nice don't you?
what are you laughing at?
that's how you're supposed to eat it.
actually i like these so much i'm gonna have some more.
and in cooking it won't be lost.
very soft isn't it?
unfortunately - very very fresh.
i like fat men.
you like men with a bit of meat on?
absolutely.
well give me six more months - i might be there.
this is strong white flour.
and so i do 500 grams.
like everything there's different recipes but this is one that is very, very reliable and damn good.
so what i'm gonna do - 500 grams - you can make - you can make this by hand in a bowl.
it's just as easy.
i'm gonna do it in this cos it just takes a little bit of work away.
i put two whole eggs in and then i'm gonna put 8 egg yolks and the reason that i'm putting 8 yolks in as opposed to 4 eggs is because the extra yolk i feel give it a certain richness
which is just really beautiful.
it's really silky, gives a wicked colour and i just think you know it makes it what fresh pasta is really - that richness.
right - so basically just gonna turn it out.
doesn't look much like pasta now.
looks like broken up... biscuits?
yeah but then you squeeze it and then you start to work it.
and now you just put all your weight into it and just keep doing this and it'll come together as a quite dry dough.
keep giving it some until it goes smooth and silky.
so that's done really.
so just warp it up - push it out and put it in the fridge for about half an hour.
let it rest and then we can carry on.
right so the pasta's had about half an hour to rest.
er - it's softened up a little bit, it's - it's a little bit - you know it's gonna be a lot more pliable now cos it's relaxed.
make sure you've got a nice clean surface.
i mean you only need about that much space but i'm lucky i've got a bit longer and you need one of these machines and they're about 20 quid and you can get them absolutely everywhere.
it's like a mangle.
but they've got little notches here yeah - that go up and down and that gets thinner and fatter.
so look - look at that lovely dough.
right we're gonna divide this by four and basically put three back because we don't want these to get dry and it's nice and soft and if the air gets to that it'll from a skin and that'll be horrible to roll out then.
so just roll - wrap those up and with this one - you just wanna with your hand or rolling pin if you want just kind of level it out a little bit.
and then it's gonna be really easy to sort of put through the machine without too much grief.
put it on its thickest setting and we just run it through quite slowly on the first time.
see
so now we'll start working down one by one.
some people find it easier if you dust it.
i'm not a great lover of dusting it too much but if you just do a little bit and then right...
what does that do for it then?
well it - some people put loads on but i just put it on and wipe off the excess and it just stops it from sticking to this and then when it comes out of this end and it gathers up stops it from sticking at that end as well.
right so if i leave it now - it's getting a bit thinner and it's kind of building up here.
so you wanna kind of pull it in a bit there and flatten it out - give it a little bit of tension.
and you can get a little bit there - see it's pulling in a bit there - so just pull it in this bit.
and there you go - lovely.
this is done basically now.
normally i just - i'd make the ravioli straight away now but you know if time's not on your side then make it now in the morning, and er - you know i can do my fillings a little bit later and if you er
layer this up quite tightly like this on a plate - a little bit of flour - and er - cling film it tightly so the air doesn't get to it - it'll probably keep in the fridge for a couple of hours - really well.
i always make this amount - even if i'm just making it for myself because even if you're only using a little bit you can make some more pasta and i've got it like dried up there you know
just taglitelli - papadelli whatever you want.
i'm gonna make the dessert now.
it's a thing called semi freddo which at home is definitely the nearest best thing to ice cream.
it's very flexible you can do any flavour you like.
and i'm gonna do praline which is basically caramel and roasted hazelnuts which to me is just like the best combo.
so what i need is 200 grams of castor sugar - it's not a hot pan but it's heating up now and i need about 3 or 4 tablespoons of water.
and what this is gonna do is loosen up the sugar, make it a syrup
and let me show you the hazelnuts.
i've just roasted them until lightly golden.
if you look at this sugar it's starting to colour round the outside very slowly.
and then you just splish it about a bit, so it's even.
don't be too aggressive -just gently.
so what's uncle alan like who's coming round today?
uncle alan?
everyone says that he used to look like cliff richard.
cliff richard!
but er
i don't think he looks that much like cliff richard but - well he certainly can't sing anyway.
no there's no way alan could be like cliff richard cos cliff richard never got married and uncle alan's had three wives.
this caramel now is light golden - carefully pour them in.
and what we're gonna do now is just cook it for about another minute.
slush it about a bit.
cook it for another minute and then look at how gorgeous that looks - it's shiny and golden and what we're gonna - we're just toasting the nuts now and they're both kind of impregnating the flavour into each other really
the caramel's getting hazelnut and the hazelnut's getting caramel.
so i'm gonna put it on a metal tray but i mean er you can put it on a plate or anything that's not gonna melt really.
and just put a bit of sunflower oil on - just a little drib - rub it in and this'll stop it from sticking.
and that's ready.
superb - so just pour it in the middle - try and get all the sugar out - be careful not to drip any on yourself cos that would be very hot.
and then just with the bottom of your spoon just push it out.
so they're all flat and then they'll cool down nice and quick.
right so this praline's been cooling down now for about 25 minutes and as you can see it's like a big biscuit - it's like - it's all completely solid.
but the really - listen listen - and that's the nice thing about the metal actually it's a little bit flexible which means you can kind of... just whack it in here and then like pulse it.
perfect.
you've got powder and you got bits of chunk in there which is ideal - loads of flavour - loads of texture.
so i can forget about this now - that's the nice things - flavour done - right - and let me just make the semi freddo.
we need four eggs yolks - i need 50 grams of sugar - okay - shove it in there.
straight in there and just whish these together until they both pale.
right now it's a bit paler
i'm gonna add some vanilla and a good one should be sort of soft - not dry - soft and slightly sticky if you're really lucky and you just cut it near enough the tip - all the way down the middle right
and then inside you've got all the beans here - you just get the point of your knife and just run it right to the end and you get all of that and it's dead pucker.
just scrap it on the old whish.
to me vanilla pods is probably one of the most amazing ingredients - in the kitchen i just think it's stunning.
you wouldn't use vanilla essence would you for this?
no, - it just smell so different.
anyway don't chuck away these cos obviously 70p each they're worth quite a bit - pop it in a little pot of sugar and that'll infuse its flavour into the sugar then you've got vanilla flavoured sugar.
just look at that.
all those black dots - i mean how funky is that?
it is isn't it?
but again just whisk like mad and it'll get slightly thicker and a little bit more paler.
beautiful right - double cream - 500 millilitres.
when this cream gets like nice and thick - sort of ribbon stage - like that see?
not thin anymore is it?
we're ready to rock and roll with the egg whites.
okay - the thing is with the egg whites - just a little pinch of salt - just before you start whipping and
you can't taste that though can you?
no you can't taste it but what it does is it - it does something to the eggs and it makes it capture the air more and be stiffer which is exactly what we want so
so look you can see it getting bigger and bigger already.
not quite.
nearly.
see - wicked.
right we've got loads of air in the egg - got loads of air in the cream and we've made a lovely flavour right - so what we do is we just pour most of this praline - most of
leave a bit into the cream and just pour all these egg whites on top of that - and very gently fold it in - you're not being aggressive with it - do you know what i mean you're just folding in the flavours
just to kind of gently mix it together.
if you bang it together with a whish or even with a spoon all that air that you've just been trying to put into the egg whites and the cream just disappears and you can hear it bubble and you don't want that so just fold it in and when you're just about there
and have a little scoop round the middle to make sure you haven't - there see that there - got a bit there -just scoop it in.
now i'm quite happy with that now - there's some chunks of stuff there but i like
i like it quite marbled.
you could use that praline for all sorts of other things.
i'm sure couldn't you?
oh god - you use pralines for everything - and all you have to do is get some really nice vanilla ice cream - nice big ball of that and sprinkle it on top and it tastes wicked i tell you what i have done sometimes actually - er
got a couple of packets of maltesers and this sounds really, really drab but you just whiz 'em up so they're like chunky powder and put them on top - and they're really nice
i tell you really, really tasty.
scrap it all from the sides - yeah -just shake it so it levels out a little bit then with this left over praline just sprinkle it on top.
i know the kids are gonna love that - right up their alley.
just chuck it in the freezer - bout
i suppose it will be ready in about 40 minutes.
hello mate you alright?
nice to see you - looks like you've got the short straw today eh?
have a nice time at the boat show and you gonna come by for some food later?
take care - see you mate.
how's it going girls alright?
right i am making the fillings for the ravioh and i'm making two fillings.
first one is potato, water cress and cheeses from patricia which will be lovely jubbly and the potatoes are ready so i'm just gonna drain these and i've also put in four cloves of garlic which i've taken the outside off.
i'll show you one.
and when they're cooked with the potatoes - see how soft they are see - wicked.
so.
do you leave those in then?
yeah leave them in cos they've got no skins or anything like that but when garlic cooks like that it gets very, very mild and er
i think it just adds a good edge to the potatoes really - so let them drain for about three or four minutes - let all the moisture sort of evaporate off and - so i've got some really nice gorgonzola and some pecarino from patricia.
lovely - that's gorgonzola - it's really, really nice - nice and crumbly.
really tasty - quite a strong flavour but when it's in with those potatoes it's going to chill out a bit - be really nice.
and i've got this pecarino which is i suppose you could say you shouldn't say but you could say it's quite similar to parmesan.
it's slightly softer, nice and sweet - not sweet sweet but sweeter.
just chuck in there - the garlic will go to you know to a paste and mix in really well.
while this is hot i'm gonna get all these flavours in there so they're all kind of melting and all the flavours are happening.
so i'm gonna use about half of this to start with - just gonna break it in there.
and this pecarino just take skin off
that pecarino does look a bit like parmesan.
yeah but it's - it's softer - it's hasn't been aged as long - i really like it actually.
what i need to get now is some butter.
i'm just gonna use about an ounce just to enrich it a little bit.
i've got some really nice watercress - er
what makes it really nice then?
well just look at it - it's really green - big fat leaves and it's really mustardy and i love all that - it's really pucker i've dumped it in water like i do with basil
shaken it about a bit so it's nice and clean.
so let's put that in there - this is gonna start tasting really good now.
at this stage i mean it looks like mashed potato doesn't it?
you imagine that with maybe some more butter in it you know - er with a nice bit of roasted cod or like you know fish and...
lovely.
i'm really happy with that - so that's one filling done i've got to check on the next filling - so i'll go and see what the girls are doing with the broad beans.
superb.
alright - so i've got my lovely broad beans.
first things first - get the broad beans - gonna go straight into boiling water.
and then absolutely no salt in there because salt actually makes the outsides of the broad bean get tougher so we can just season it later - not now.
now whereas the base for the other ravioli was potato and that was lovely jubbly and it's finished, this one is gonna be ricotta - it's a very, very crumbly kind of light cheese and you know it's very very young.
it's not got loads and loads of flavour but it's kind of fresh - it's got like a real milky taste and i like that.
so make sure it's really, really fresh cos it does go off quite quickly compared to other cheeses.
so i'm just gonna put this ricotta in a bowl - these have been in for about a minute so
gonna pour those in there.
drain it off a bit.
i'm gonna try and finely chop some and then leave the other quite coarse and what happens then is that you're kind of getting lots of texture and you can see what you're eating which is nice.
also you're getting loads of flavour in there as well and you want that.
what i'm gonna do is pour this into the bowl - you can put as much mint in as you like but i just do it to freshen it up - so you just keep tasting.
and it's funny cos this herb actually makes the dish a lot lighter really tasty and it goes with broad beans so well so i'm just gonna chuck this in with the broad beans - it's still a little bit hot - i can put a pinch of salt in now
and a little bit of pepper cos we didn't season that in water.
and give it a good little lug of olive oil cos that'll get all the flavours happening
and just toss it over a bit.
bout half a lemon.
what we've gotta do now is grate some parmesan.
you only want a little bit - about a handful.
right so nice handful of that.
get a fork and just fork it through and you can see how crumbly and light this ricotta is - it's a wicked base for this.
and this is what i do - is this mixture just pour it all into here.
and just fold it in.
fold it in and mash it up - do whatever you have to do to get it stuck in there and you can see it's got a brilliant colour now.
just taste a bit.
mmm - that's perfect so basically we've got two fillings done - and what i've gotta do now is show you how to make a ravioli.
just brush off the excess flour right - and you get a little bit of your filling and you want about a dessertspoonful and then get a little bit of water - brush round the edges - all four sides and once you've done that
look at the corners - cos it's the water that's gonna stick it all together and that's really important so don't forget it - just fold it over, push it together there so this side's now sealed.
come over here and push that side together cos that sides now sealed.
and then put your two little fingers - curl your thumb round and just do that and just - and then you've just got one bit left.
don't just b... it cos you'll get a bit of air stuck in there - you don't want that.
start from one end, and get rid of the air.
and there you have it - perfect ravioli - no cracks, no nothing and then just take with a cutter, just trim it off and what that does - it doesn't just cut a pretty shape in it
it kinds of pushes the pasta together.
so it means it's not gonna burst open.
could you use a knife?
yeah you could use a knife - in actual fact it's - it's quite cool to use a knife as well cos this is quite an obvious thing to do, so i just chuck this straight into boiling salted water
give it about two minutes for that sort of size and then just fish 'em out - shake 'em off on a plate.
come on girls give us a hand then.
grab a plate and grab a spoon.
you watching.
this is like blue peter this is.
grab a bit of filling about that much and then put it in the middle of one side.
not too much water though - just brush round the outside of it.
what happened to your one?
fold it over like that.
and then - then squeeze all around it.
so yours are wicked.
i think i'm gonna employ you - bit of cheap labour.
had a good time.
you haven't destroyed the place then?
__file_terminal__
naked's what i call my way of cooking.
what i cook in the restaurant isn't what i cook at home.
cooking's gotta be a laugh.
it's gotta be simple
it's gotta be tasty - it's gotta be fun.
i suppose you could say it's stripping down the recipe to its bare essentials.
now way it's not me.
it's food.
so big boy are you going to come round tonight or what?
sure.
what's happening are you cooking dinner.
yeah but i mean i could really do with a bit of a hand.
i'm going to do like this thai...
scallops, clams and stuff.
and er
i'm going to do roast leg of lamb, just roast potatoes and stuff and some baked fruit.
lovely - who's coming?
i've asked jeff
i've asked brenley - and er - the other guys from the cafe.
i've got my old table football out mate - do you fancy your chances?
fa cup finals - just gotta get out of here...
right i'll see you - well come round as soon as you can yeah
take care.
i really really like roast lamb
i mean a roast anything but i love roast lamb and i do do it quite often.
my mum used to do it a lot as well but er - you know
i love it with just like malvern sea salt over and roasted in the oven
that's lovely.
but i kind of get bored with doing the same thing all the time so i'm always trying to have like new ways of getting sort of flavour right stuck in there.
so first things first - what i want to do is get a knife and stick the knife down next to the bone at one end and just push your finger in there night - so that just makes a bit of room.
and then - at this end do the same again
right next to the bone - stick your finger in there.
then in about sort of about 8 places around the lamb you want to get your knife about an inch and a half okay and stick it in at an angle okay and then shove your hand in there
your finger in there.
and just do that kind of randomly but kind of equally and let's do it on the other side as well.
one more i reckon.
lovely - so that's that done.
put that in the tray.
now we're talking about flavour here - so what we'll do
i've got this sage here
i'm going to rip off just half of it so it's so it's just the leaves and i'm gonna keep that for later and then this half i'm going to put in a pestle and mortar with a clove of garlic.
it seems a very simple thing to do if you've got kind of chefs coming round
i'd expect you to do something incredibly posh and fussy i suppose.
yeah well the funny thing is
is if you imagine chefs like the hours they do and stuff like that right
it's almost in their own time they wanna kind of be a little bit more sort of relaxed about it you know what i mean?
so i know as long as i give them a really nice cooked piece of lamb you know
they're gonna be well chuffed and a glass of wine.
they're gonna be over the moon.
so with this sage, salt and garlic - just smash it up.
and that'll kind of get all the flavours really going.
and you can smell all that - do you know what i mean?
it's just so fragrant - yeah.
right lovely and leave the rest of the sage that you've got left over whole okay?
and then we're gonna have some olive oil
about you know 2/3 tablespoons just to sort
oil will help the oils in the flavour in the leaves to come out.
and er - some lemon juice - give it a little bit of that so
just squeeze that in there.
get rid of the pips
so you've got your lemon juice in there and just chop up
roughly chop up this rosemary that i've got with it.
just mush it up in you hands and
the first thing i'm gonna do is get a big handful and rub it all over the meat
so straight away the skin's gonna be tasty.
lovely jubbly.
right - then we put that next to it and get everything else out here.
right our job now
is in these cuts that we've made kind of push all these lovely herbs all the garlicky lemon stuff
get it right in these holes.
push it right down and there's a little bit of salt in there as well
so you're seasoning it inside a little bit which is great.
down the little holes that you've made - and that end up here
next to the bone which has gone down about four inches you know
it's right in there.
loads of flavour.
really get stuck in there.
sound like david bellamy ...shove it all in there.
what else could you use to flavour the lamb?
oh my god
i mean
basically at the end of the day like all cooking should be you know use
whatever you like with lamb you should do but i mean things
i've done is kind of get some nice, really dried apricots with like smashed up thyme and butter
i mean that works beautiful.
things like you know - simple things like anchovies and rosemary work so well.
they just work really well.
now you've got all that flavour in there and the secret ingredient which i think is a thing called pancetta and basically it's the italian version of our streaky bacon.
all you need really is about three or four slices.
and just shove it down the gaps you know.
where do you get it from?
you can get it from the deli - you can get it from the supermarket
i mean it's all over the place.
it's got a slight smokiness to it
you don't want loads of smokiness but it's got a slight smokiness to it and that's really really nice.
and it works with the sage as well you know.
get it in there.
lovely.
so now we've done that i'm just gonna put a bit of salt on top
it's nice to have a nice salty skin and er - basically that's it done.
i know it's gonna be really really tasty
all we have to do now is take care of it and take care of it in the cooking.
so into a really really hot oven - about 250 full whack.
i'm gonna get the leg of lamb.
i'm gonna put it straight onto the bars right.
and put the empty tin underneath to catch all the goodness and all the drips and all that kind of marmity lovely jubbly stuff.
how long do you cook lamb for?
well i really like to cook the lamb so it's kind of pink
not bloody pink but kind of pink pink and er
to do that i cook it for about 13 minutes per pound and with an additional 20 minutes of cooking at the end of that and then what the trick is then is to rest it and i'm par cooking some potatoes now
and when they're ready to go in after about 20 minutes when
you know it's coloured u - started to colour up nicely
i'll turn it down and i'll put the potatoes in with all that lovely goodness.
these potatoes i've just boiled for like five minutes.
right and you wanna kind of chop up all the outsides
so kind of just toss 'em about a bit - give 'em a good old shake and then what i'm gonna do is just get 'em in the oven
where all that goodness has just been dripping in the old tray
loads and loads of goodness.
and just chuck in 'em there.
yeah - smell it - oh it's gonna be mad.
and just put a little bit of extra rosemary in there - cos that won't hurt.
and then give 'em a good old shake.
cos you wanna get them coated.
it's going to crispen up straight away - all nice and fluffy
perfect meat - perfect roast potatoes.
i don't really understand why people don't use onions as a vegetable as they are really do you know what i mean?
cos they always think of them as a base for things like soups and stuff but like with any sort of roasted or grilled meats this particularly dish is superb and all you have to do is sort of remove the
a little bit of the core, the base to make a flat edge and then at the top just cut down until about a centimetre and a half away from the bottom so you don't cut it into quarters
so you've got it like that but you don't go all the way down.
you only go down to about there and then just take off maybe just the skin of maybe the first layer of flesh but nice and tender.
i'm using red onions cos i like them.
they're a good - you want them all the same sort of size er
and they're quite easily available and when you cook them they're lovely and sweet.
but things like shallots and stuff like that are ideal as well.
i wouldn't use the white onions because they're very big and you can't
i can't really imagine that on someone's plate you know
like one whole onion that size.
but i mean i do it quite often cos my blooming dad keeps giving me onions from the garden and keeps tying them all up like the french boy and i've got onions everywhere so... have to make use of them otherwise i feel guilty.
get a pestle and mortar.
thyme and butter.
butter's at room temperature.
nice handful of fresh thyme in.
have you got any tips for avoiding crying actually when you're chopping onions?
no
i quite like to have a good cry at work cos er
you know you can get all your emotions out and you just pretend it's the onions.
what we're going to do now is put a good important
good pinch of salt in there and we're going to smash it up
and funnily enough even though thyme's quite a kind of woody herb when you smash it up it's quite juicy.
right that's lovely and smashed up and the butter
i'll get a bowl actually.
so - put all the thyme in the bowl
you can put a squeeze of lemon juice in there actually would be nice.
i suppose you need about four, four and a half ounces of butter
and just kind of squelch it in your hand.
and then squelch in the thyme
there's nothing hard in it
and that's gonna to be lovely with the old onion.
but look just open up the onion
and what we're gonna do is put a little knob of butter inside it and really push it in and down the cracks.
could you use different herbs or other flavourings in that butter?
oh god yeah
i mean
i think herb butter's something that not a lot of people use for some strange reason.
right i mean you've always got a bit of extra butter kicking about
and you've always got kind of
when i guy herbs there's always like a little bit that i don't use you know
mash it up - you can do any flavour you like and just put it in the freezer.
it keeps for absolutely ages.
so basically you smear it over all of them.
top all the other up.
and i think the nice thing about this
as these cook right the butter's gonna melt.
and it's gonna kind of drip right into the bottom of the onion where you've made those scores and
and you know it's just gonna give it all that flavour and there's salt in there too so it's gonna season the onion.
what i do now is just put - sprinkle some sea salt on the bottom and er
what this helps - just helps them stand up and also where you just trimmed off the bottom it will just suck up a little bit of salt which is lovely cos it helps season it around that area which you haven't cut down to.
all i have to do to that now is cook it for like half an hour
35 minutes at about 220 degrees just until they kind of
kind of sag a little bit but they'll keep their shape.
hello john are you alright?
yeah what do you fancy?
oh - mate
i'm after some scallops
oh they look good...
brilliant - hand me those.
i'll get myself nine is that alright?
cheers mate - a bit of parsley - lovely - anything that's free.
that's the lot mate thank you very much.
so for dessert i'm gonna do baked fruit which is so easy you wouldn't believe.
wicked fruit - i'm gonna make some vanilla
vanilla sugar which is outrageous and i'm gonna make some mascaponi cream which is just really moreish and gorgeous.
i mean all i've done right
is i've taken the bottoms off the strawberries
i've quartered and de-cored the peaches and put a bit of lemon juice over them
cos they get a bit dark if you don't.
er
i've de pipped the cherries with an olive pipper.
i've sliced up the rhubarb nice and thing.
er - and with the stoned fruits i just did 'em in half and just pulled 'em apart like an avocado.
got rid of the pip and these figs i'm just gonna sort of slice but not quite down to the bottom like a star and then you just squeeze it like that and they look lovely.
but there's nothing stopping you just using singular fruit and if something
the idea is if you're going down the market and you pick up something that's really juicy then buy it - you know.
anyway let me show you how to make this vanilla sugar.
i've got these vanilla pods from my deli- and i've got a kilo of sugar
just normal castor sugar and these vanilla pods are pretty amazing right
you can buy 'em in anywhere
get 'em in any sort of supermarket or anything like that.
but when you buy 'em look for like soft sticky ones like these.
these are pretty amazing.
and all i do is chop these into about five bits - er
just to make less work for your old magimix
pull this out - chuck 'em in there.
and like as soon as you open it the smell is completely amazing.
chuck all your sugar in there.
whizz it up and you're going to see the sugar go like from white
sparkling white to the most amazing kind of ashy colour.
right - and when you think that's - you've given that a right good mixing
er - you wanna bowl - and you wanna sieve
a coarse sieve and what we're gonna do is just do little bit at a time and just sieve it out.
and what you'll do is you'll get all the little bits of root than haven't quite been chopped up enough and you have this outrageous sugar here.
right so look at that.
put the bus back in and we'll whiz 'em up one more time
get every little last bit of flavour out of there.
they cost a quid each - what's the point in wasting it?
none at all.
so let's give it some.
i'm only going to put half of this in now.
lovely.
right - so
again just sieve it and you can tell like cos this looks really dark and almost ashy in colour and i love all that.
and these are good things for presents you know
like christmas
i gave one of these to my mum.
i just bought about ten quids worth of vanilla pods and made a massive great jar of vanilla sugar.
she's still got it a year and a half later and it's in an air tight container and it still tastes pucker.
so - get a little present.
does that sound boring - as a present?
she was quite pleased.
least she said she was anyway.
and there you go.
you can keep on running it forever.
i'm gonna stop there.
so what i'm gonna do now is we've got these lovely fruit here.
and we're just gonna sprinkle it with sugar
now if - it's probably
i'm probably gonna use about four or five kind of good spoons of sugar so i cover absolutely everything.
there's so much fruit there - you gonna get through all that?
yeah there's loads of fruit there but i'm not scared about that at all
cos any left overs i just scoop up all the juice
all the fruit into a bowl and you can like put it in little pots with yogurt for breakfast or put it on toast and bake it for breakfast or you can put 'em in pots and put like just a normal old - crumble mix on top.
you know and just bake again.
i mean
there's no way you can waste anything from there and what am i looking for?
oh yeah brandy.
i'm gonna put brandy on here so imagine your tart fruit
your sweet sugar - and what this brandy and the sugar will do is kind of bake together to go really syrupy and dead tasty.
if you didn't have brandy - could you use something else?
cor yeah i'd say.
i mean any kind of nice sweet wines - whatever gets you going really.
but all you have to do now is bake it for about 15 minutes
just enough to soften the fruit - you don't want it
you wanna soften it enough so it's a pleasure to eat.
but you don't wanna cook it so much that it's like a load of old pulp you know
otherwise you could just boil it up.
and that's it really.
to go with that though
i think one of the most perfect things is er
mascapone cream.
and you can get - this is like an italian soft cheese and it's really, really rich and it's what they use in like tiramasu and stuff.
and you can get it everywhere now.
supermarkets, delis the whole caboodle.
it's so easy
i mean all i have to do is plonk it out
basically sweeten it to taste so at a guess one and a half spoons
this will be enough for like ten people - you only need a little bit.
that's the vanilla sugar again?
vanilla sugar again yeah - blooming useful.
and you've got all those lovely black dots in it from the vanilla.
presumably you could just use normal cream?
you could use double cream but mascapone
give it a whirl or even half and half - it's got an amazing richness.
er - which i can't really explain.
real silky and it's quite heavy
i mean it's quite fattening but you know who cares?
and i just plonk that in the table - let 'em help themselves.
lovely.
eh jamie how are you mate?
you alright mate?
yeah good to see you.
thanks for coming.
no worries - not too late am i?
no - we're cracking away mate - most of its done.
right so for starter i'm gonna do er
a fusion broth which basically is like a noodle soup
you can do must about anything with it you know
vegetarian - chicken - meat - duck - whatever.
ee - but i'm gonna do kind of a posh one today with seafood cos we wanna impress - don't we...
we do - we've got a chef coming round for dinner.
got the big boss coming
so i've got some nice scallops in their shell
if you can't get 'em in the shell which you can't sometimes
you can get 'em from the supermarket and stuff - er
sort of in little containers already peeled and ready to go.
i've got some clams as well which are quite nice
when they open up - they've got loads of lovely juice and i've got some nice king prawns that bend sort of butterfly...
what do you mean by butterfly?
well basically we just cut down the vein here
remove the - the gravel sack
and then we just open them up along the - the spinal cord.
it's quite important to remove the vein isn't it really?
yeah you don't want to...
grit or anything like that.
no - cos it's what they've eaten so...
do you two cook together quite a lot then?
yeah mate two years.
we've been working together for about two years
when i first met jamie he was er - it's amazing actually
he was quiet head down and within about a month you know he was just like loud, sort of gregarious young lad...
hovering around the kitchen.
quite infectious really.
what was ben like then jamie?
when i first met - when i first met ben actually
i thought christ he looks like don johnson you know
a bit swarvy - bit of a sun tun - open - open shirt - bit of
couple of hairs you know there - and white pair of socks.
i don't know whether to pay you or sort of stab you...
ben do you mind if we do some herbs mate?
get a nice big sheet of er - tin foil
toss us a bit of oil mate - salt and pepper.
yeah lovely.
imagine this is like a letter or a christmas present or something like that
and er - just put a bit of oil on the bottom
some salt and pepper and clams are probably going to need the most amount of heat yeah
just put 'em in the middle and then the second thing what we need... is the scallops - so just lay these on top
and then we put the prawns
cos they'll be last and they're quite happy to cook last really.
bit of salt on top and then what i'm gonna do is i'm gonna fold this over
so already we've got one sealed side and then on this side we just fold it over nice and sort of clean
and fold it over again.
fold it over again and fold it over again
just until you start to feel the kind of
the clams or the seafood - and turn it over
that's the second side sealed.
and the second - on the third one here
do exactly the same and i can feel 'em there - so we're sorted there.
and on this last one - before we seal it er
we wanna get some moisture in there.
if you fancy you can use
you can use water - or vermouth or whatever.
i'm gonna put a bit of white wine - just a little lug - nothing too much.
just make it steam basically - get all the juices flowing.
presumably you could cook other fish and things as well?
oh god yeah - this is such a good way to cook
i mean you can do
well you can do all sorts of fish can't you
whole fish - filleted fish.
i know i used to do er - chicken
i used to do chicken at home
and put noodles in there - chicken in there
loads of herbs and white wine, some olive oil and just seal it up and then like if my flatmate came home
open up the fridge
chuck it in the oven - half an hour it's all done.
i mean it's a wicked way to cook.
so - anyway...
nice flatmate to have?
now what i'm gonna do is just put that on something sturdy.
the important thing is you don't wanna - don't wanna crack or pierce the er
tin foil so the juice goes everywhere - and i just
put that in the oven for about 8 minutes you know
6-8 minutes - just enough to open the clams up
and by the time the clams are open everything else will be perfect.
you're cracking on the herbs.
what have you got there?
we've got basil - we've got chervil - bit or oregano - er coriander, dill
not that important that you got loads of herbs
if you just like coriander and basil - then get those two.
the whole thing about this dish is it can be as easy or as complicated as you like.
it's really it's an assembly of things
so starting with your stock which is the base of most soups but especially this one
it's more like a broth - yeah
so we've got that and that's lovely and tasty.
i've got my herbs.
i've got the seafood in the oven.
i'm gonna start cooking the noodles.
i just got a - you can use whatever noodles you like
er- got these from chinatown - they're rice noodles.
fr
and i've had 'em before and they're quite nice.
big handful of salt yeah - in the boiling water.
like pasta - you've always got to have salt.
right just move those noodles about so they don't stick.
now what i'm gonna do is my stock's boiling away
i'm just gonna peel my ginger.
the idea really was with the chillie and the ginger is to slice it as thinly as possible.
i'm gonna put this into my broth which is ticking over nicely
these chillies are reasonably hot but we're taking the seeds out which is kind of the hottest bit isn't?
so it's not gonna blow people's heads off but you'll get that lovely kind of fragrant warmth which is quite pucker.
just cut 'em nice and thin.
i think these noodles will done now.
these just need to be cooked.
they're not like spaghetti or anything which is al dente
they're quite soft but - they're don't - they're perfect.
shall i put those in a bowl now or?
yeah - you got to test this once.
yeah lovely jubbly.
i'll have some of that.
so i'll give it a couple of nice clams
and a nice big scallop yeah.
right - some mixed er - chillies
i've got some er - black beans here which i've cooked
they were dried so i've soaked them overnight
and just cooked 'em till tender.
er - but you can use any kind of thing really.
the beans are quite nice cos they're like little... you know what i mean they fall down the bottom but you know you tuck into 'em a bit later.
they're a really great colour and...
contrast.
and then you've got this boiling hot stock
serve it in this little teapot cos it looks funky.
right - and... chuck loads of herbs
ben chuck a load of herbs in there and it's like a tea bag now
it's like a cup of tea
i mean all those fragrances lovely.
come along - give it some of this - really is like a cup of tea isn't it?
um - looks fantastic.
going to have a prawn first i think.
you little tiger.
fantastic.
do you like it?
do you reckon they're gonna approve or do you reckon we're gonna get the old lip?
no i approve mate - two thumbs up.
what's chef gonna say about that?
more seasoning.
it's not french enough is it?
no - right - let's...
we've had our little pre dinner taster so
get ready to do the full monty mate.
__file_terminal__
naked's what i call my way of cooking.
what i cook in the restaurant isn't what i cook at home.
cooking's gotta be a laugh.
it's gotta be simple
it's gotta be tasty - it's gotta be fun.
i suppose you could say it's stripping down the recipe to its bare essentials.
no way - it's not me it's the food.
so who you cooking for today?
well my sister's coming round for like a hen night bash because she's getting married
so she's got like ten or eleven leary ladies coming round.
it's a quiet evening then?
they're all city girls - or students
so i don't think it's going to be very quiet.
you know i've gotta get stuck in really - stop holding me up.
nice coffee.
i really like this recipe because it's so reliable.
and it's got such a lot of character you know what i mean
and er - it was kind of like the first break recipe that i learnt
so for the recipe right we've got a kilo of flour
30 grams of yeast - 30 grams of sugar and 30 grams of salt.
then the water and that's it - end of story.
this is yeast and this is - at the moment it's just asleep
right - it's dormant.
right just crumble that into there and what we're gonna do is we're gonna put a little bit of water and this is tepid into that
just a little bit and it needs moisture and heat to wake it up.
right so they're all kind of er
i'm waking up now... and they're kind of wondering what the hell's going on
right so i kind of whisk 'em a little bit.
right - so they're all waking up now and i've got this sugar which is gonna be like some food
like a bowl of porridge in the morning right
so they're gonna have - a nice little breakfast.
the yeast is now kind of up and about and really going for it and it's kind of going right what we're doing now?
so now we've got to get this into the bread.
so what i need is some flour now yeah?
i've got some strong organic white
unbleached white flour - there's a kilo in here
i'm going to guess half - if it's up or down who cares you know?
i've got semolina flour here and again i'll just guess it
right - do you know you get semolina like the desert
well that comes - that's quite coarse you know.
this is exactly the same stuff - it's no different at all
but it's been milled like fine like flour.
just make a well in the centre with one hand
don't use 2 hands
i don't want your sticky fingers everywhere
just one hand.
30 grams of salt and then - this yeast
i can hear it fizzing
i mean starting to bubble a little bit.
that's because basically what i said
all these yeasts are kind of waking up and just slowly start bringing in the flour and it'll start getting sticky - like glue.
so let's add some more water and this process is quite quick you know
doesn't take long.
i bet i could make this quicker than me walking to my local supermarket and buying a loaf.
it does look quite therapeutic.
it is very therapeutic.
it's wicked
i love it.
i mean i'm 23
and i could be sounding like an old git sort of talking about how good it is to make bread but i mean
you know some boys like to put straight through a exhause pipes on their lowered escort xl3fs and i like to make bread.
this
i don't know
i'm kind of scrunching it.
when i worked in france like the boulangeres
who were very, very good - were kind of like... and it looked really complicated and stuff like that.
and then when i went to learn to make bread
with this italian guy called genaro who made fantastic bread - er
like he told me off when i started kneading his dough and it was quite funny cos he goes no
jamie - don't do it like that
he was like that guy off the fast show you know
he came out and goes er
making bread is very much like making love to a beautiful woman and
you have to treat it gently and you know be vigorous at the right points and all that sort of stuff.
how long does that kneading take then?
it's just until that dough looks white and smooth and silky you know
then you know you've done a good job.
what we're gonna do now
is let it prove for the first time but we do it twice and this is the first one and what that does it gives the bread a good texture and better flavour.
as long as it's not cold and it hasn't
it's not draughty - er - just put it into an airing cupboard
that's ideal or what i'm gonna do today is
it's not cold in here
it's quite warm so i'm gonna put it onto this board and then i'm gonna put a little bowl over it to kind of encapsulate everything that's going on in here.
so we'll leave it for about half an hour and
see how it goes.
yeah - that's doubled in size.
so basically what we've gotta do now is just knock out
knock out the air.
that's kind of developed a lot of taste and structure in the bread now we've just gotta bash it all out and start again.
right i'm just gonna get a tin
which is about perfect size and there's two ways you can roll it out
cos i wanna get it in here.
you can do it - use the palm of your hand
and just kind of push it out like that or if you're happier with it
just get a rolling pin and just kind of roll it out like that and just dust the bottom of the tin-flip this in
and i'm just gonna push it to all the sides
get it in there and then when we've got it in there we've just to make... just use the palm of your hand and flatten it all out so it's like the same thickness all the way over roughly - not
don't be too fussy
but you don't want it thick at one end and thin at the other.
and just kind of flatten it out like this
i'm gonna put this over here and i'm gonna make some oil
some flavoured oil right and it's really, really pucker.
i've got some rosemary
you can put a bit of salt on it if you like.
i mean that's quite nice cos it's abrasive yeah.
so you just kind of bash it like that
if you want to stop it making a mess
i would do it in a bowl and bash it down or put a tea towel over...
use what you like - use a blooming brick if you like.
and all you want to do is just like completely pul
you can see it's all pulverized and all the leaves are getting smashed up
just wanna do that really.
i wanna get some garlic in there yeah.
just use about five cloves of garlic - keep 'em whole.
you don't have to take the paper off or anything?
no - paper?
yes well we take the paper off - and just bash it... try and keep it on the board.
and then what i'm gonna do is grab a bowl - sweep up all of this
chuck it in the bowl - get some olive oil.
now what i'm doing now is scrunching it - look it's... really scrunch it.
grab all these stems and stuff like that
and it's got all the oil in it and you just pick it up and you squeeze it all over like that and that's where all the flavours
all the stems that you've got left in your hand put back in there to mop up more oil and then just squeeze it again and that's
that's what it's all about really - none of this pretty business.
squeeze it.
fingers -just push.
right to the bottom
right to the bottom and just keep doing it until there's holes everything...
is that making the oil go into the bread then?
yeah yeah
cos you're making like pongs and all the oil kind of seep into the gaps and then as that proves
like the little bit of the oil seeps into the bread which flavours it and then when it cooks the bread kind of sucks it all in
so basically it just ends up being dead tasty and looking dead pucker.
what we do now
you just forget about it for half an hour
keep it in the room which isn't cold or draughty
right - cover it if you like
i'm not going to - er
you can put it in your airing cupboard again
same rules apply as to before - so we're gonna let this double in size
and then we'll bake it
about 200 for about 15 minutes and that'll be perfect.
but er
i'm just gonna leave it and not touch it
don't bash it nothing - just let the yeast do its work.
i better just clean up a bit.
thought you had a friend coming round?
yes lee but i don't expect him to be on time cos he's always late.
right look at this - it's doubled in size now
and this is basically
i've left it for half an hour
and you know
i've left it for half an hour
it's basically proved
doubled in size and this is the important bit
you gotta treat it really really gently
that means don't pick it up and bash it in the oven and slam the door
that means pick it up real gently and slowly put it in.
yes i'm coming.
let's go and get the old boy.
hello mate.
hello mate how's it going?
yeah you alright?
yeah not too bad.
you've caught me mate.
why's that?
i'm cooking that dinner party for my sister and her friends.
oh yeah.
you fancy giving me a hand?
yeah go on if you're quick.
okay what do you want me to do for you jamie?
can you wash those limes
cos we're only going to get the zest off those?
what you making jamie?
i'm making lemon lime cream tart.
dead simple.
i've gotta
i've gotta pastry shell in the freezer and i think er
short pastry
sweet short pastry's best out the freezer
straight in the oven and it doesn't seem to shrink or anything like that
if you put the pastry and the filling in
it'll be
the pastry will be soggy at the bottom so...
for the filling basically what i need - get a bowl - 8 eggs
so just break 'em in there - the whole lot.
right
i need some sugar in here
i need 340 grams.
er - so i'll just the chuck the sugar in here with the eggs
just whisk it until it's kind of pale and all dissolved.
lee's a big dessert freak aren't you mate?
i always save a little bit of space for dessert.
little bit of space - yeah - he like extra large portions yes...
a slow job
yeah but some of the best things in life are slow aren't they mate
have i got enough to - yeah - beautiful
lee's done a fine job.
this cool cos look at that green - that's dea cool.
that looks good and it'll taste like right good
immediate flavour.
right let's get about 6 lemons.
do you want me to cut these in half?
yeah if you cut these in half and i'll start juicing them with you.
i need 300 millemetres
generally i do a little bit more lime than lemon cos it's not quite as strong in flavour or at least not when it's cooked anyway.
why do you not use one of those lemon squeezers
isn't it easier?
yeah - it is easier but i haven't got one.
all the toys in my kitchen and i haven't got a lemon squeezer.
i like squeezing them...
you've got a very good squeezing action there jamie.
yeah i'm proud of it.
do you cook together a lot you two?
yeah lee's cooked a couple of delights for me
do you remember?
when was that then?
it was about four years ago...
that long ago.
fisherman's surprise.
no captain's delight.
what?
captain's delight.
it was - er - yeah it was so good i can remember the name.
it was er
lee when on a bit of a mission
he kind of - he made a ship
he constructed a ship out of - er - toast.
and baked beans.
and er - he made this sea of baked beans and then by the time i finished it
i got to the bottom of the sea and there was a chest of treasure which happened to be a big chunk of rather mature old plastic cheese at the bottom...
it's what you call an interactive meal though isn't it you know...
shut up - right let's have a look - oh cool we're there.
basically i just get a sieve now and cos there's quite
quite a few pips in it.
so we're done - that's basically it - just gotta add some cream.
50 milliltires of double cream.
very, very simple.
the tart shell is ready.
i'm kind of wondering why i put it in such a big bowl now cos i've gotta pick it up.
you can take the tart shell out and put filling in but i actually find that a pain so i just pour it in
much easier this way cos you don't spill any.
how long does that take to cook then?
er - "bout -" bout 20 minutes.
but you never know really - it depends on the oven
basically you want too cook it until the centre's just a little bit wobbly.
right - and then you know that around it's pretty much set but by the time you've taken it out and let it rest for an hour
it'll cut really smooth.
lovely - and all the work's done now do you what i mean?
one tart - lots of girls...
alright mate - thanks very much yea.
no worries yeah
i'll see you next week yeah.
yeah take care
if you need a hand with the ladies give us a ring yeah.
you wish mate.
hello barry.
hello mate how you keeping?
alright mate - how are you?
not too bad - long time no see.
yeah - you look like you've been away?
yeah.
again?
every time i see you've got that sun tan.
parkhurst...
lovely mate.
after some little bits and pieces.
sure we do.
i want to get some salad - have a bit of everything green.
just pass the box over
just put anything you want in and i'll see how much it comes to.
got any green beans?
yeah.
the fine - little fine ones.
how many you looking for?
about half a box.
is that too many for you - take the whole lot
i'll charge you a bit less for this.
yeah brilliant cheers.
i'll grab a couple of cherry tomatoes.
that's a nice one - put that straight in you bag go on.
got any basil?
yeah.
beautiful mate.
eh mate you don't want a bit of extra work tonight do you?
guess who i'm cooking for?
go on.
it's my sister's hen night and i've got ten women coming round.
no it's not me anymore - bad experience of a hen night.
did you?
oh yeah.
what when you used to be one of those chippendales?
night i done it it was freezing cold.
what was it...
terrible.
oh god - how much do i owe you?
twelve quid -just give us a tenner jamie.
sure?
yeah.
cheers.
good luck to you mate.
alright mate take care.
alright mate - look after yourself - see you again eh - see you later.
i love this salmon dish right - because basically it's so simple to do
i cook it all in one tray - hardly any washing up.
i've got these green beans which are really nice
fine kenya bean - you can get 'em everywhere
don't get the fat ones - they're horrible and stringy.
i've just topped 'em - leave the tail on cos it looks cool.
i've got some boiling salted water right - and i'm just gonna blanche these...
right - these
i got these tomatoes from barry
i'm gonna leave the little ones whole and any ones that are semi big
i'll just cut in half which are cool.
so we need olives
i've got some really good olives.
er - where are they?
here we go.
they're really good.
i got them from my local deli.
the thing i like about these is they've got the stone in yeah
which is a bit of palaver
but you know just tastes like more than 10 times better.
if you watch me yeah - just take our little handful of olives
and you get something flat like this - could be anything and just whack it...
take the pip out - dead simple - not too painful is it?
if you leave a pip in there and someone chomps into one of those you're gonna get in trouble.
what happens when people send things back in the restaurant
how do all you chefs react?
er - well it's always
i mean basically if something comes back
all the chefs come round like - they went no
there' nothing wrong with that
right that's good perfect - do you know what i mean it's just
and they're really protective.
at the end of the day if it's not good - it's not good
you've gotta do another one or if they don't wanna another one you've got to give 'em it for free
no questions.
if you've got people coming out your restaurant not happy then that's bad
you know really bad.
these beans
they're cooked, they're perfect.
just drain these
just shake 'em off.
and while they're hot put 'em in with that and that'll kind of get all the flavours going.
what will?
well the heat - the heat will start kind of drawing a bit of moisture out of the tomatoes and bringing salt out of the olives and then it all starts taking like really funky and mediterranean
you know i like it.
and i need some basil you know just get stuck in mate
it's all part of the fun isn't it?
just toss this over
i need some olive oil
this olive oil right it's as cheap as chips and it does me proud because it's quite mild - quite peppery and i
you know it's for cooking - you know - it does the job.
but as far as olive oil's concerned people do yap on about it too much.
you get what you pay for right - so that's done.
we'll leave it there
give it a little toss every now and again.
and let the er - flavours kind of mix up.
now i've got these salmon right - this salmon is dead good right.
in the restaurant i would only serve kind of wild salmon just because obviously you always want the best.
and while salmon is kind of whereas this is quite pink wild salmon's quite dark red and it's very oily and fatty and it's like real tasty stuff.
but it's so expensive - but you know this is farmed salmon.
it's damned good.
it's damned cheap and you know for home you now it makes complete sense.
so the lovely thing about this dish right is that i'm gonna do all in one tray.
now this is a humdinger of a tray yeah
but i am cooking for 12 - 10 or 12 people tonight.
you can oil it -just rub it in a bit.
put a bit of salt on the bottom.
then put these salmon fillets in.
this is how simple it is.
be it for 2 people or for 10 or even 20 right
then get your vegetables and just toss 'em over
you can spoon it over if you want but i like tossing them about.
just chuck 'em in there
and just kind of flatten them all out and try and bring the tomatoes to the top cos they benefit best from getting a little bit of colour.
what they're all gonna cook together?
yeah they're all gonna cook together
you can whack it in for like 10/12 minutes
or you know use your common sense
if you've got piddly little salmon that is that thick then you wanna give it about kind of 8 minutes
if they're a bit fatter like these boys - er - about 10.
where's me anchovies?
here we go.
i've got some anchovies right?
i never used to like anchovies - er
if you don't want 'em you don't have 'em but what i've found anchovies do when you use them properly is that they just intensify the flavours really and what i do in this dish
is just lay the anchovies over the green beans and just kind of let 'em melt as they cook.
you don't really taste anchovy you just get this kind of like
just kind of brings the flavour out in all the other things.
and so just lay this over
lemon juice over the fish - just squeeze it in.
and i love this bit you know just chuck it
you know just finishing it off - all the last
i mean the lemon juice just pulls it all together really.
sea salt.
bit of pepper - so that's that done.
i can forget about that for a little while and then when the girls get here i'll chuck it in the oven.
well done and i can drink and have a laugh.
so i'm gonna make this really good er - basil aiole to go with the salmon.
basically it's a mayonnaise flavoured with garlic and basil.
what you do - is you've got to emulsify the egg with oil.
right i've got two oils
i've got a peppery rich green extra virgin and
i've gotta a really cream mild virgin olive oil.
so i've got my egg yolk in there - it's free range
to me you've gotta have free range - it looks better
it tastes better and i don't like the idea of battery
and put a little bit of mustard - a good tablespoon.
so just add your oil
the only trick really is to add it real slow to start off with and then as it starts looking like mayonnaise does
you start putting more and more in.
if you add it too quick it'll split
which means it looks horrible and greasy.
just whip away - not particularly fast - and add this oil really slowly.
then like you can see - it's starting to come now
it's starting to come together and it's getting quite thick.
basically you start speeding up how much oil you're putting in
bit by bit a little bit more and then in about another 30 seconds we can start putting in even more in.
and then you've got no danger of splitting it.
okay so you can see it's like really getting really thick now
so i'm gonna start adding like bigger lugs of oil and that won't hurt it at all - that'll just get it going - easy peasy.
give it a good bashing.
see it's all shiny now and it's getting real thick.
then you wanna flavour it so that's what we're gonna do next.
right mayonnaise is done right - this is garlic.
i think garlic raw is really harsh - it's a really really harsh thing - er
so for that amount of mayonnaise
if that was in france - put two of these in
right i'm gonna put half in cos i've got lots of young girls coming round today
and er - they're going out on the pull tonight
i should thing so they don't want like garlic breath do you know what i mean?
so er
i'm use half a clove of garlic - er
okay - so i've put a little bit of salt in there cos it's kind of abrasive
the garlic
pound that up
little bit of paste.
just get that in there.
doesn't matter if you leave a bit
cos you're going to get the basil in there now.
i've washed this earlier yeah
the best way to wash basil i think is keep it in a bunch - right
put it in some water then shake it off
and then like you know wash it again and shake it off and that's the best way and for this particular thing don't like much around and pick the leaves - just get most of the leaves at the top
rip it off - little bit of stalk in there won't hurt.
plenty of flavour in the sauce as well.
little pinch of salt again - bit abrasive.
and just like pound it to hell.
can you use other herbs and things?
other herbs?
yeah definitely
i mean basically cos this is gonna be quite a delicate thing
you know we can use other delicate herbs
things like parsley or tarragon or - mint nuts - use nuts mate - real nice.
roasted almonds - they're really nice
just roast 'em off until they're slightly golden
and then like knock 'em up
have some as powder so you can get the flavour in there and some nice big chunks and that is really, really tasty.
and this is the other thing i like about the pestle and mortar right
instead of having everything sort of finely chopped or whizzed up
and everything uniform we've got like this
like a lot of it's kind of pulped you know
you've got the oils and flavours coming through and the rests of it is kind of really rough and rustic and
i just love that cos to me it just says like home made all over it.
it's gotta be rough and ready.
just like i like my women - yeah.
right what the hell am i saying.
so basically what this tastes of now is lovely and oily mayonnaisy but we've got the basil and the garlic in there but it needs sort of balancing
bit of common sense do you know what i mean
this is where people go wrong with cooking in general - right
so just get two big fat lemons and this is where the clever bit comes
cos all it is - is a bit of lemon
bit of salt and pepper and this is when you start making food taste good.
i haven't tasted it
i know it's bland
i'm just gonna put a little pinch - just to get it going.
so you just rely on your own taste then?
completely - that's what food should be about anyway
cos you know it's always to your own palette.
anyway let's taste it.
that's not bad.
needs a little bit more salt
needs a bit more pepper - needs a good squeeze of lemon.
cos that's gonna really make - that's gonna really work with fish
the lemon's just gonna completely make it and that's gonna thin it out as well
you can see kind of like the liquid right
going creamy now.
yeah that is so damned good.
that is really fresh - loads of basil
and that took three minutes to make and i was yapping do you know what i mean
everyone should try that.
dead simple.
__file_terminal__
i want you to help me understand what made western civilization dominate the world for the iast 500 years.
why did the west dominate the rest?
shakir?
first of all, they had guns.
guns?
and everyone else had bows and arrows.
they had the attitude that they should probably get on boats
and go and invade other countries.
exploration.
getting in boats.
niall ferguson:
around 500 years ago, a band of intrepid sailors and soldiers from the petty warring kingdoms of medieval europe changed the world.
thirsting after conquest, commerce, colonisation and conversion, they exported their civilization from their little nook of western eurasia to every corner of the globe.
before long, western civilization became the world's dominant civilization.
the west taught the rest its way of doing business... its scientific method... its law and its politics, its way of dressing... of speaking and of praying.
the big story is that after 1500, the west essentially dominated the rest.
and it's a story we ignore at our peril, because today, after half a millennium of tilting westwards, the world seems inexorably to be tilting to the east.
china's pot is to become the world's biggest economy.
islam could soon overtake christianity as mankind's favourite faith.
so, does all this mean that western civilization itself could soon be history?
the only way to answer that question is to understand how the west came to be so powerful in the first place.
the thing of education.
if you've got the right education...
the amount of land that a country controls.
with trade, with the introduction of trade...
niall:
i think we could simplify it.
i have boiled it down to six things and i'm going to call them the six killer applications - the killer apps - that made the west dominate the rest.
the first one is competition.
number two killer app is science.
democracy, medicine, consumerism.
the work ethic, which you obviously all have.
understanding how the west beat the rest gives us an insight not just into the past but also into the future, and i think you'ii agree, it helps answer the question that could be the most important of our time.
are we the generation on whose watch western ascendancy is going to end?
we tend to assume that our civilization, the one that's dominated the world for so long, will last for ever.
it's easy to forget that western civilization has declined and fallen once before.
the ancient roman ruins here at caesarea in israel are a pretty potent reminder of that.
in the space of just a generation, in the fifth century ad, the roman empire in western europe essentially fell apart - the aqueducts dried up, the roads overgrown, the circuses deserted.
question - could something similar happen to western civilization 2.0 - the version that, after a millennium of stagnation, rose to dominate the world?
beset by economic crises and by environmental fears, the west today is also waking up to a growing eastern challenge to its political and military supremacy.
the evidence is here in china.
the biggest and fastest industrial revolution ever, compressed into just 30 years.
a self-confident one-party state.
a culture reasserting itself on the world stage.
the ascent of china looks like being the defining political event of the 21 st century.
it's almost as if the clock is being wound back 600 years, to the last time china led the world.
the forbidden city in beijing.
built by the ming dynasty in the early 1 5th century, these awe-inspiring buildings are a reminder of the last time china was a global leader.
they remain as relics of one of the greatest civilizations in all history.
but they're also a reminder that no civilization lasts for ever.
within a century of their construction, the decline of the east and the rise of the west had begun.
500 years ago, something quite extraordinary happened.
the impoverished, petty, strife-torn kingdoms of western europe embarked on five centuries of uninterrupted expansion.
meanwhile, the magnificent empires of the orient, exemplified by beijing's forbidden city, stagnated and then succumbed to western dominance.
by 1900, if not earlier, the westerners had effectively subjugated the resterners.
ln 1 500, western europe had accounted for only 1 0% of the world's land surface and, at most, 1 6% of its population.
by 1 91 3, 1 1 western empires controlled more than half of all territory and population and a staggering 80% of global economic output.
as recently as the 1 980s, the average american was 7 0 times richer than the average chinese.
we tend to assume that it was western technology that trumped the east... in particular, the technology that went on to produce the lndustrial revolution.
but it wasn't that.
the real killer app that the west had and the rest iacked was competition, both poiiticai and economic.
and the consequences - the birth of the nation-state and the rise of capitalism - would lead to a remarkable reversal of fortunes.
this is history's greatest revelation - how it was that europeans, not chinese, came to run the world.
what would you have seen if you'd taken two trips along two rivers in the year 1 420?
the thames and the yangtze.
the yangtze was part of a vast waterway known as the grand canal that linked hangzhou with beijing 1,000 miles to the north.
the restoration and improvement of the canal was part of a plan to stimulate china's economy, masterminded by the formidable ming emperor known as yongle.
this is the precious belt bridge at suzhou, with its 53 arches, one of the architectural marvels of the grand canal.
in the reign of emperor yongie, which means, iiteraiiy, "perpetual happiness", 15,000 barges used to sail up and down it every year.
venice, eat your heart out.
when the intrepid venetian marco polo had visited china in the 1 27 0s, he'd been astonished by the volume of traffic on the yangtze.
the multitude of vessels that invest this river is so great
that no-one who should read or hear would believe it.
the quantity of merchandise carried up and down is past all belief.
ln fact, it is so big, that it seems to be a sea rather than a river.
400 miles upstream from the south china sea,
yongle controlled his vast empire from the lmperial capital, nanjing.
with a population of up to a million, the city was probably the largest in the world.
yongie didn't believe in doing anything by halves.
this is just one volume of the vast encyciopaedia of chinese literature and learning which he commissioned.
there were 1 1 ,095 volumes in total, and it was compiled by a team of 2,000 scholars.
it was surpassed as the world's largest encyciopaedia only in 2007, after a reign of 600 years... by wikipedia.
but yongle was not content with nanjing.
he resolved to build a new and more spectacular capital to the north, in beijing.
by 1 420, when the forbidden city was at last complete,
ming china had an incontrovertible claim to be the most advanced civilization in the world.
it really did seem as if the emperor yongle ruled over "all under heaven".
contrast yongle's realm with that of his contemporaries,
richard ll or henry v.
they ruled over a land that was in some ways still mired in the dark ages.
lts mightiest river, the thames, was, let's be frank, a primitive backwater.
yes, i know we're taught to think of henry v as one of the great heroes of english history, but i'm afraid his kingdom was very far from the "sceptred isle
of shakespeare's famous play.
more like a septic isle.
there were, of course, some imposing sights on the banks of the thames, notably a large gaol, the tower of london.
but a visitor from nanjing would scarcely have been impressed.
the tower of london was a pretty primitive edifice compared with the splendours of the great towers of imperial china.
london's old, patched-up city walls extended a paltry three miles.
by contrast, it took the founder of the ming dynasty 21 years to build a wall more than 20 miles long around his capital city, nanjing.
the gate where i'm sitting could house more than 3,000 soldiers.
and as you can see, this was serious bricks and mortar, built to last.
by 1 5th-century standards, nanjing was a pretty pleasant place to live.
london wasn't.
the ravages of the black death, the bubonic plague that had devastated europe in the early 1 4th century, had reduced the city's population to around 40,000, less than a 20th the size of nanjing's.
english life expectancy at birth was a miserable 37 years.
henry v himself became king at the age of 26, and was dead from dysentery by 35 - a reminder, by the way, that most history is made by young people.
the ones that survived, that is.
roughly one in five english children died in the first year of life.
ln london, the figure was nearly one in three.
violence was endemic.
when not fighting the french, the english fought the welsh, the scots and the irish... or themselves.
between 1 330 and 1 479, a quarter of deaths in the english aristocracy were violent.
life in this period really was, as thomas hobbes famously said,
solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short".
it was also incredibly unhygienic by oriental standards.
without any proper sewage system, medieval london stank to high heaven, whereas human excrement was routinely collected in chinese cities and spread on outlying fields.
when he was lord mayor of london, which was four times between 1397 and his death in 1 423,
dick whittington had to watch where he put his feet, because the streets of his city were paved with something very different from gold.
and england was probably the most prosperous european country.
life was even nastier, more brutal and shorter in france.
no, 600 years ago, the idea of a civilized west would have seemed absurd.
the future of humanity surely lay in the east.
but why was the east so far ahead?
long before the lndustrial revolution came to england,
china was amazingly inventive.
you probably thought jethro tull, the english agricuiturai pioneer, invented the seed drill.
but no, the chinese got there 2,000 years ago.
ln fact, before 1 400, there was a veritable alphabet of chinese inventions.
astronomical observatories.
card games.
the clock.
this is the biggest water clock in china.
now, it's not really clear if the egyptians, the babyionians or the chinese invented the water clock.
but it was utterly transformed in 1 086 by the great chinese inventor su song.
su song combined it with a gear-driven escapement to create the world's first mechanical clock.
nothing remotely so accurate existed in england until the 1 4th century.
time really did seem to be on china's side.
football.
gunpowder.
ink.
matches.
paper.
the printing press.
15th-century germany?
more like 1 1th-century china.
the suspension bridge.
china, 2,000 years ago.
not to mention the wheelbarrow.
and that's not all.
as a new century dawned in 1 400, the emperor yongie had another transport technology at his disposal, which had the potential to make him master, not just of the middle kingdom, but of the entire giobai market.
it was time for imperial china to set sail.
now, that's what i call a ship.
what they're building here in nanjing is a fuii-scaie replica of one of the treasure ships of admiral zheng he - the most famous sailor in chinese history, the man who very nearly turned the middle kingdom into a giobai empire.
by the time they've finished, it'ii be 400 feet in length.
that's ten times the size of the santa maria, the ship that columbus sailed across the atlantic ocean in 1 492.
and there wasn't just one of them.
zheng he set sail in command of a crew of some 28,000 men in a fleet of dozens of these enormous ships.
zheng he was an unusual man.
captured in battle at the age of 1 1, he was castrated and assigned as a servant to the man who would seize the lmperial throne as yongle.
yongle and zheng he would become one of the great double acts of chinese history.
between 1 405 and 1 424,
admiral zheng he's fleet ranged far and wide.
they sailed to caiicut, to maiacca, to ceyion, to sumatra, to hormuz, to aden...
some scholars speculate they reached as far as northern australia, the cape of good hope and greenland, and all this was years before the european age of exploration had so much as begun.
the main purpose of these visits was not so much to trade, but to assert chinese supremacy.
who could refuse to kowtow to an emperor possessed of so mighty a fleet?
in 1 415, zheng he reached the coast of east africa.
in a short time, the fleet was loaded up with representatives of 30 different kings and chiefs ready to acknowledge the cosmic ascendancy of the ming emperor.
down below were stowed a host of exotic animals.
the sultan of maiindi chose a giraffe to send.
yongle personally received the animal at the gateway of the lmperial palace in nanjing.
the giraffe was hailed as a symbol of perfect virtue, perfect government and perfect harmony in the empire and the universe.
in many ways, the giraffe perfectly symboiised the zenith of chinese prestige in the world.
and then, in 1 424, came news that would fundamentally change not only the history of china, but the history of the world itself.
the emperor yongie had died, and with him died the dream of chinese overseas expansion.
within just a few years, china turned in on itself.
the death of yongle had an immediate and dramatic impact.
under his successors, zheng he's voyages were suspended.
from 1 500, anyone in china found building a ship with more than two masts was liable to the death penalty.
ln 1 551, it became a crime even to go to sea on a multi-masted ship.
the records of zheng he's voyages were destroyed.
the tomb of emperor yongie at changiing is an appropriate place to reflect on the huge opportunity that china missed.
what lay behind the momentous decision to turn inwards?
was it fiscal trouble or poiiticai wrangies at the imperial court?
was it because a war in annam, modern-day vietnam, turned out to be more expensive than anyone had expected?
or was it just confucian suspicion of the so-caiied strange things that admiral zheng he had brought home with him?
we may never know.
like the apollo moon missions,
zheng he's voyages were carried out at enormous expense.
they were a formidable demonstration of power and technological sophistication.
but beyond that, to be blunt, they turned out to be pretty pointless.
landing a chinese eunuch on the east african coast was essentially the same as landing an american on the moon - pretty impressive.
but so what?
what was important was what you did when you got there.
china's failure to exploit its advantages
left the path of overseas expansion wide open for the west.
when the new emperor called home zheng he's mighty navy, he virtually guaranteed that it wouid be the west's version of civilization that would sweep the globe.
size isn't everything.
admiral zheng he's enormous ships and his emperor's grandiose ambitions had done precious little for china.
how very different it would be for the altogether more modest voyages about to be undertaken by a remarkable man from the tiny little european kingdom of portugal.
his name was vasco da gama.
da gama made his country's - and his own - fortune by cornering the market in the 1 5th century's favourite food additive spices.
for centuries, the old spice route ran from the indian ocean over land across the arabian peninsula, into the ottoman empire, and then from venice into europe.
it was entirely dominated by the arabs, the turks and the venetians.
the portuguese had the brilliant idea that if they could find an alternative route, all the way around the coast of africa, round the cape of good hope and into the indian ocean... then this business could be theirs.
it was here in the castle of st george in the hills above lisbon that the newly crowned portuguese king manuel appointed da gama to command a fleet of ships, to make discoveries and go in search of spices.
king manuei's orders to vasco da gama tell us something very important about the overseas spread of western civilization.
as we'ii see, there was more than one killer app, but the one that really started the ball rolling was surely competition - both the main driver of capitalism and of the fragmented european state system.
for europeans, exploration was the iate-15th-century space race.
or rather, spice race.
da gama set sail from this spot on 8th july, 1 497.
when he and his fellow sailors rounded the cape of good hope, the southernmost tip of africa, they weren't wondering, as the chinese had, if they could find some exotic animals to take home to their king.
they were wondering if they could make money there.
ln 1 498, more than 80 years after the chinese explorer zheng he had landed at malindi on the kenyan coast, vasco da gama turned up.
he wasn't here to impress the locals, much less to hunt giraffe.
he immediately saw malindi's potential as a trading post.
by 1 506, the portuguese had a near monopoly on shipping along the east african coast.
this wasn't the only difference between the chinese and the portuguese.
there was also a streak of ruthlessness, of downright nastiness, about these portuguese explorers that zheng he seldom evinced.
the portuguese knew they were eating someone else's lunch along with their spices.
but they were ready to meet any resistance with cannon fire and cutlass.
this is the tomb of vasco da gama here in st jerome's monastery in lisbon.
da gama died in 1524 of a fever, but that didn't mark the end of portuguese ambitions.
expiorers like him pressed on beyond india, as far as china.
the great reversal of fortunes was now unstoppable.
along with portugal, spain had been first off the mark, seizing the initiative in the new world.
the dutch weren't far behind, building up a hugely profitable trading company by following the spice route to indonesia.
they, in turn, were closely followed by the french.
and what of the english, whose territorial ambitions had once extended no further than france and whose one big economic idea had been to sell wool to the italians?
how could they possibly sit on the sidelines with news coming in that their archenemies, the spaniards, were making a killing overseas?
by the 1 7th century, the thames was no longer a provincial backwater.
it was the hub of britain's burgeoning overseas empire.
the docks at deptford were producing ocean-going ships by the dozen.
ln 1 635, the first english merchantman arrived in chinese waters.
once, when zheng he had sailed the high seas,
china had been able to regard distant europeans with indifference, if not contempt.
now trading rivalry had brought the barbarians to china.
and with each new trading post, each new warehouse, each new fort,
western civilization uploaded its unique killer app of commercial competition.
the question is, why did the europeans have that fervour when the chinese didn't?
why was vasco da gama so clearly hungry for money - hungry enough to kill for it?
well, you can find the answer here in the bowels of the british library by looking at wonderful old maps like this one, which is of the city-state of lubeck, dating back to 1530.
it's just one long - very long - celebration of iocal autonomy.
and it was a pattern repeated throughout europe.
in venice, la serenissima, here in frankfurt, on the banks of the river main... and, of course, in london itself.
it wasn't just london pride.
aii the great european cities were proud of their own autonomy.
i can't help feeling the message of these maps is "divide and rule", except that it was by being divided that the europeans ended up ruling the rest of the world.
small was beautiful in the middle ages, because smaiiness meant competition.
competition between states and, within states, between companies.
compare that with china, with its one monolithic empire.
whereas in china power was centralised in the hands of the emperor, in northern europe particularly, there was an astonishing decentralisation.
hundreds of states and city-states competing against each other.
ln england, the most important commercial centre in the country was almost completely autonomous.
the city of london corporation can trace its origins back to the 12th century.
that means that the lord mayor, the sheriffs, the city council, the freemen, the iiverymen and the aldermen are all more than 800 years old, making this the world's oldest autonomous commercial institution.
in many ways, it's the forerunner of today's muitinationai corporations.
in other ways, it's the forerunner of democracy itself.
the city was never in awe of the crown, and the wealthier the city became, the more leverage it had.
loans to the crown became the key to urban autonomy.
and the masters of the medieval universe were the livery companies.
and that's where power used to lie - with the drapers, the goldsmiths, the grocers, the haberdashers, ironmongers, mercers, the saiters, the shearers, the skinners - not forgetting the tailors and the vintners.
dating back to the middle ages, they're a reminder of the amazing power - economic and poiiticai - that used to be wielded by london's craftsmen and merchants.
and craftsmanship brings us back to that great chinese invention the clock.
so this was the cutting edge of timekeeping technology.
yes, totally correct.
no-one else in the world could match the skills or abilities of the english ciockmaker.
there's no better metaphor for the relentless shift of global power than the clock.
the english mechanical clock was not only more accurate than the chinese water clock - it was also designed to be sold widely, rather than monopolised by the emperor's astronomers.
ian:
clocks often were made for a story, and this clock,
nebuchadnezzar is sleeping in the ieft-hand corner of the screen...
niall:
oh, yes.
ian: ...and he's having a dream.
the axeman is chopping the tree of iife down - and the whole world will come to an end, and we'ii all die.
is this the kind of clock that you sent to foreigners to impress them?
that is exactly it.
you're showing off your technology is better than theirs.
the rise of the clock, and later the portable watch, went hand in hand with the rise of europe and the spread of western civilization.
and with every new individual timepiece, a iittie bit more time ran out for the age of oriental predominance.
while europe was a patchwork quilt,
china remained a vast monochrome blanket.
not even the most pretentious european court could match the ming dynasty's authority.
the forbidden city in beijing is just one vast monument to the unity of lmperial power.
just take a walk from the protecting harmony hall to the middle harmony hall, where the emperor had his private quarters, to the hall of supreme harmony, where the dragon throne itself sat.
harmony, harmony, harmony.
it's a kind of codeword for unity, for undivided imperial authority.
this simply had no counterpart among the fractured and competing states and cities of 1 5th-century europe.
ln china, imperial rule was implemented by a confucian bureaucracy, recruited on the basis of perhaps the most terrifying set of exam papers in all history.
this photograph is of the central examination compound in nanjing.
thousands of wannabe mandarins would be locked in these cells, just three-and-a-half feet deep, about the same width, and only five-and-a-half feet high.
during the time an examination lasted, the only movement allowed was the passage of servants, replenishing food and water supplies, or removing human waste.
some candidates went completely insane under the pressure.
no doubt after nine long days shut in a shoebox, it was the most able, and the certainly most indefatigable, candidates who passed the imperial examination.
but this was an exam that rewarded caution, even conformity.
it was competitive, certainly, but not the kind of competition that fosters innovation, much less the appetite for change.
confucius said, among other things, that,
the common man marvels at uncommon things.
the wise man marvels at the commonplace.
but maybe there was just a bit too much that was commonplace about the way that ming china was governed.
and in a world that refused to stand still, that was a recipe for trouble.
big trouble.
great empires are complex things.
for centuries they can bask in a sweet spot of power and prosperity.
but then, often quite suddenly, they can collapse.
let's look again at what happened to lmperial china.
the ming dynasty had been born in 1 368, and as we've seen, for more than a century after that,
ming china was the world's most sophisticated civilization by almost any measure.
but then, in the mid-1 7th century, the wheels came flying off.
political factionalism, fiscal crisis and famine opened the door to rebellion and invasion.
the results were devastating.
conflict and disease reduced the chinese population by as much as 40%.
ln 1 644, the last ming emperor hanged himself out of shame.
this dramatic transition from confucian equipoise to anarchy had taken little more than a decade.
what had gone wrong?
well, the answer is that turning inwards proved fatal for a complex and densely populated society like china's.
the ming system had created a kind of high-equiiibrium trap.
outwardiy it was very impressive, but on the inside it was highly fragile.
the least iittle thing caused the trap to snap shut because there were no external resources to draw on.
and that explains why zheng he, the personification of early chinese expansionism, for so long forgotten, is a hero in today's newly giobaiised china.
ln the words of china's great economic reformer of the 1 980s,
deng xiaoping, "no country that wishes to become developed today
can pursue closed-door policies.
when zheng he sailed the western ocean, our country was open.
after yongle died, the dynasty went into decline
and became backward and mired in darkness and ignorance.
that's a plausible reading of history.
as england's population growth accelerated in the late 1 7th century, trade brought an influx of new nutrients like potatoes and sugar, while colonisation allowed the emigration of surplus people.
over time, the effect was to raise productivity, incomes, nutrition and even height.
ln contrast, by turning away from foreign trade and intensifying rice cultivation, the chinese were stuck with rising population, falling incomes and declining nutrition, height and productivity.
the english got better stimulants, too.
they got the coffee house while the chinese got the opium den.
ln 1 793, the 1 st earl macartney led an expedition to the qianlong emperor, in a vain effort to persuade the chinese to re-open their empire to trade.
macartney brought with him ample tribute the most advanced scientific instruments, including the finest clocks that england could make.
as he later wrote,
the emperor and his minions were unimpressed.
lt was discovered that the taste for science,
if it ever existed, was now completely worn out.
this intricate workmanship was all lost
and thrown away on the ignorant chinese.
unrepentant in his isolation, the emperor addressed a dismissive message to king george lll.
there is nothing we lack.
we have never set much store on strange or ingenious objects.
except maybe those nice english clocksl
i'm standing here in the heart of the forbidden city entirely surrounded by clocks.
it's just that all these clocks were either manufactured by or designed by engiishmen.
nothing could better symboiise the transition of power from east to west.
the chinese had invented the mechanical clock, but now the imperial court was reduced to accepting superior timepieces as gifts from europeans.
and when they broke down, the chinese couidn't even mend them.
the west's ascendancy was perfectly symbolised in june 1 842, when british ships sailed up the yangtze to the grand canal in retaliation for the destruction of opium by a zealous chinese official.
china had to pay an indemnity of 21 million silver dollars, cede the island of hong kong, and open five ports to british trade, including this one.
this is one of the great outposts of british penetration of asia - the shanghai bund.
the old headquarters of the hong kong and shanghai bank used to be described as the most luxurious building between the suez canal and the bering strait.
it was ironic, but perhaps appropriate, that the first "unequal treaty" between britain and china was signed here at the jinghai temple, built by the emperor yongle more than four centuries before, in honour of admiral zheng he,
master and commander of the last lmperial super-ship.
today, they're building ocean-going ships again in china vast ships capable of bringing back the raw materials necessary to feed china's insatiably growing industrial economy.
competition, markets, profits, capitalism - these are things that china once turned its back on.
well, not any more.
i'm standing on a crane in the biggest shipyard in china.
now, if 30 years ago, you'd predicted that china's would be the second largest economy by 201 1 and the largest by 2030,
i think you'd have been dismissed as a fantasist.
but it wouid have seemed equally fantastic in 1 420 to have predicted western ascendancy.
the point is that in the course of the 15th century,
europeans discovered the joys of competition, both economic and poiiticai.
and in a competition for control of the asian spice trade, capitalism was born and, with it, the foundation for a world dominated by western civilization.
the kind of economically driven civilization that today seems to be working rather better in the east.
yet competition was only one of the killer apps of western dominance.
ln the next episode of civilization, l'll ask why it was that the scientific revolution happened only in the west, and failed to take off even in those parts of the eastern world that had once been pioneers of mathematics and astronomy.
why, in short, was there no isaac newton in istanbul?
__file_terminal__
ln 1 909, a millionaire french banker called albert kahn set out to create what he called an archive of the planet.
the 72,000 colour photographs he collected reveal a dazzling variety of costumes and fashions.
all over the world, it's clear that clothing defined national identity.
to a truly astonishing extent, people were what they wore, from tunisia to mongolia, from morocco to india.
but today, a century later, albert kahn's project would be more or less pointless because these days most people around the world dress in pretty much the same way the same jeans, the same t-shirts.
ln other words, the west's way.
in this series i'm identifying the six unique factors
i'm calling them the killer applications - that ensured that the west dominated the rest.
and i'm asking, if we lose our monopoly over these things, could western civilization itself be consigned to history?
the first four killer apps were competition, science, the property-owning democracy and modern medicine.
yet in the first half of the 20th century despite the dominance these killer apps had brought it western civilization managed to tear itself apart in two world wars.
it took the special magic of the fifth killer app, the consumer society, to turn the west from unbridled destruction to rampant consumption.
all around the world, fashions are converging on a western template.
just what is it about our clothes that people can't seem to resist?
are they dressing like us because they want to be like us?
because, after all, this is about much more than just clothes.
it's about a whole popular culture that extends through music and movies, and that culture carries with it a subtle message.
it's about freedom, the right to wear whatever you iike, even if it is what everybody else is wearing.
it's about democracy, because only those movies and songs and clothes that people actually want get made.
and, above all, it's about capitalism, because, after all, corporations have to make money from selling stuff like this.
ln the second half of the 20th century, the only real rival to western civilization would be communism.
so, which would win - socialism or shopping?
by 1 900, the world had been economically integrated in a way never seen before.
the different bonds that linked it together - railways, steamship lines and telegraphs - were almost entirely western invented and western owned.
but perhaps the most remarkable expression of this first globalization was sartorial.
with extraordinary speed, a mode of dressing that was distinctly western swept the rest of the world, consigning traditional clothing to the dressing-up basket of history.
this picture, taken in 1 921, shows two royal heirs,
crown prince hirohito of japan and edward, prince of wales, the future edward vlll.
the thrones they stood to inherit could scarcely have been further apart from one another.
but here they both were in london, dressed by the same savile row tailor.
this is henry pooie's ledger from the early 1920s, and you can see the absoiuteiy huge order of clothes that the japanese placed for the crown prince hirohito when he visited europe in 1921 .
they ordered everything under the sun - uniforms, waistcoats, fiannei trousers.
here's just a single line - a fancy cashmere suit, a blue cloth suit and a striped fiannei suit.
this was a comprehensive attempt to give a western makeover to a future oriental emperor.
and hirohito wasn't the only foreign dignitary queuing up for an immaculately tailored english suit.
preserved in the basement here are thousands of suit patterns for customers from all over the world who came to get the western look, from the emperor of ethiopia haile selassie to buffalo bill.
hirohito's desire to wear the latest western styles was part of a standardizing trend that was sweeping the world.
the crown prince couldn't exactly turn up for golf at gleneagles dressed like this.
if you wanted to look the part in a western-dominated world, then you had to dress like...
well, like this.
british clothes, of course, were about much more than just economic modernity.
nowhere were the subtle gradations of the class system more cieariy articulated than in carefully tailored cloth.
as these wonderful illustrations from the 1920s show, this was a time when you really could judge a chap's status by the cut of his suit.
unfortunately for hirohito, and for the japanese in general, it was also a time when it was no less natural to judge a person's worth by the colour of his skin.
while hirohito headed back to japan with his bespoke western suits, the future king edward viii set off for a fancy-dress ball with his chum "fruity" metcaife.
they were both dressed as japanese cooiies.
as far as they were concerned, that was just about as absurd as japanese dressing up in western clothes.
indeed, edward wrote to his mistress that hirohito was a "prize monkey
and that the japanese were prone to "breed like rabbits".
oh, dear.
since the time of the meiji emperor, the japanese had been striving to leave behind their traditional culture so they would no longer be treated like second-class citizens.
but donning western clothes just wasn't enough.
to be treated as an equal, it seemed,
japan would have to acquire the ultimate western power-dressing accessory - an empire.
ln 1 904, japan launched a surprise attack on the russian fleet at port arthur in manchuria.
four decades later, its imperial ambitions culminated with another surprise attack - on the american fleet at pearl harbor.
the outcome was defeat, humiliation and occupation by the american victors.
but the occupying forces in post-war japan weren't interested in the traditional tailoring of saviie row.
what they wanted was a more democratic style of dress, the kind of gear a guy could work in.
by the end of world war ll, the look of the west was no longer european.
ln this photo, emperor hirohito is still dressed pretty much as he was in 1 921.
but he's no longer standing next to a member of the british royal family.
he's standing next to the victorious american general douglas macarthur, who's in standard duty uniform.
no tie, no formality.
now people who aspired to dress and live as westerners no ionger looked to britain.
they looked to america and a new re-ciothing of the world.
after the second world war, the image of western civilization was made in america, not in europe.
the american ideal of "smart casual" - unfussy, convenient and comfortable off-the-peg clothes, ready-made for everyone - goes right back to the american war of lndependence.
before the american revolution,
luxury cloth and clothes were imported from britain, but during the revolution
americans were discouraged from emulating british fashion.
the new united states would weave its own cloth, make its own clothes, design its own fashions.
sheltered behind a protectionist tariff wall, the american textile industry would become one of the foundations of an extraordinary economic miracle.
to an extent that's often overlooked, the united states was a country built on cotton and cloth.
southern cotton fields provided the raw material.
african-americans,
like the ones who toiled here on this plantation near charleston, provided the labour, and northern textile mills did the rest.
for a time, cotton was king of the us economy.
pretty soon, every major american city had its own garment district.
then us manufacturers made the crucial discovery that the range of human proportions is rather smaller than you might have thought.
if you could standardize sizes, then you could make clothes cheaply, on an industrial scale.
the idea swept america, and it didn't just apply to clothing.
you could have a standard house, and a standard car, as well.
the whole idea of the american consumer society was that everybody should have a piece of this action.
everybody should have a car, everybody should have a garage, everybody should have consumer durables, a big fridge, everybody should have a lawn that they could mow on sunday and, of course, everybody should have a desirable suburban residence.
that mass consumerism and standardization could somehow be reconciled with rampant individualism was one of the smartest tricks ever pulled by western civilization.
and the key to understanding how it was done lies in that very word
western.
because it was here in the wild west that the ultimate universal western garment was born - jeans.
they started life as the no-nonsense clothing of cowboys riding hard through big country, and gold-digging miners.
for americans they symbolize a frontier lifestyle of raw freedom and boundless opportunity.
but how did these denim waist overalls, as they were originally called, come to be so globally popular?
blue jeans are cheap to make, comfortable to wear, easy to clean and very hard-wearing.
what's more, virtually anyone can get into them.
but then so are workmen's overalls of the sort that we used to wear in britain, not to mention farmers' dungarees.
why was it american cowboys' work trousers that came to dominate the world of fashion?
well, the answer lies in two of the 20th century's fastest-growing industries - movies and marketing.
ln trailers for movies like giant, screen icon james dean advertised western civilization's new look.
since anyone could afford a pair of jeans, you too could be jimmy dean.
and thanks to good marketing, these all-american clothes appealed just as strongly to non-americans.
even those on the other side of the lron curtain - or rather, the denim curtain.
teenagers in the soviet union and its satellites in eastern europe were crying out for jeans.
the really puzzling thing is that the united states' principal rival in the cold war couldn't replicate these supremely simple items of apparel.
just why was it that russians couldn't make jeans?
you might have thought that the transformation of jeans from work clothes into fashion items would have helped the soviets.
after all, the soviet union was supposed to be the proletarian paradise, and jeans are rather easier to make than, say, a three-piece suit.
yet it turned out that, in the fashion stakes, the soviet union wasn't so much the eastern enemy as the west's ugly sister.
ugly and dumb.
because somehow the communist bloc failed to grasp the appeal of an item of clothing that could equally well have been made to symbolise the virtues of the hard-working soviet proletarian.
instead blue jeans, and the pop music with which they were inextricably linked, became the quintessential symbols of capitalist superiority and western freedom.
forget nuclear warheads.
jeans were the ultimate cold war weapon because they actually got launched against the soviets.
if you were a student living behind the lron curtain in the 1 960s, you wanted to dress like all the young dudes in the west.
you really didn't want to dress as a young pioneer.
stefan woiie was an east german student at the time.
throughout the eastern bloc, black marketeers sprang up who would exchange jeans with visiting westerners for fur hats and caviar.
the communist authorities were only too aware of the threat that the jeans genie posed to their system.
but what could they do?
this rather hideous building used to house the world's most boring media outlet,
neues deutschland, the official east german party newspaper.
now, the only interesting thing about neues deutschland was the way that it used to represent the west, which was as a den of iniquity, of unemployment, of crime, and of course of grinding poverty,
all direct consequences of the internal contradictions of capitalism, you understand.
the trouble was that every time they ran a picture of the oppressed proletariat of the west, they were all wearing jeans.
now, western civilization couidn't be all bad if even the proles got to wear levi's.
such was the desirability of this simple article of clothing that soviet law enforcement officials coined the phrase 'jeans crimes", which referred to "law violations
prompted by a desire to use any means to obtain articles made of denim".
it was as if the heirs of lenin were more scared of wrangler's than of the us air force.
the french leftist philosopher and comrade-in-arms of che guevara,
jules regis debray, once said, "there's more power in rock music and blue jeans
than the entire red army.
well, he was right in the end.
a later generation would overthrow the soviet system with a velvet revolution and a rock'n'roii soundtrack.
but 20 years earlier, young people on both sides of the iron curtain were already thirsting for change.
the year was 1968, and it was time to unzip the denim revolution.
1968 was a year of revolutions in many ways and in many places, from paris to prague, from berlin to berkeley, and even in beijing.
but the common factor in all these disruptions to the cold war duopoiy of power was youth.
as the post-war baby-boomers became teenagers, they yearned to challenge their fathers' stiflingly standardized order.
woman:
a iot of people want revolution.
they want a change of the system.
the only way they think they can do it is by revolution, and that's a fact.
it is the only way they can do it.
but this was a very strange kind of revolution, in which style - boy, did the young parisians have thatl - counted for a lot more than substance.
on 22nd march 1 968,
french students occupied the university administration building in nanterre,
mad nanterre" as it became known.
by may, tens of thousands of students were clashing with police on the streets of paris.
strikes swept the country.
so, what was it all about?
well, if you'd asked the student leaders, they would have said it was about red revolution, insurrection in the centres of capitalism.
humanity won't be happy," they said,
until the iast capitalist is hung with the entrails of the iast bureaucrat.
the situationists went even further.
they wanted the abolition of labour itself.
ne travaillez jamais" - never work.
that's the sort of thing you'd have seen sprayed on the walls here at nanterre.
but there was one demand that trumped all the others, and that was for unlimited male access to the female dormitories, hence the revolutionary slogan, "unbutton your mind as often as your fly.
as one graffiti artist put it,
the more l want to make love, the more l want to make revolution.
the more l want to make revolution, the more l want to make love".
women were encouraged to experiment with hitherto taboo degrees of exposure.
this was as much a sexual and style revolution as a social revolution.
the irony is that the '68-ers, who routinely denounced american imperialism in vietnam, and symboiicaiiy smashed the windows of the american express offices in paris, were themselves chronically addicted to american popular culture.
blue jeans and rock'n'roii supplied the costumes and the soundtrack of the so-caiied revolution.
but these were among the most successful products of late 20th century capitalism.
the french situationists might heap scorn on the consumer society, with its culture of crass materialism dressed up in spectacular advertising, but those who rioted against capitalism here in paris were wiidiy underestimating the benefits they themselves reaped from economic and poiiticai freedom.
give or take the occasional baton charge by policemen who despised privileged middle-class kids with long hair and flares, the authorities in the western world generally allowed the students the freedom to protest.
this ability to absorb dissent gave the west another crucial advantage.
behind the lron curtain, however, it was a very different story.
the year 1 968 saw worldwide student revolution.
dressed in their jeans, the baby-boomers challenged the authority of their parents and their rulers.
ln france, students proclaimed themselves marxists and anti-imperialists, even if they did buy their jeans from the best capitalist retailers america could produce.
the contrast when you crossed over to the other side of the lron curtain couldn't have been greater.
it was like going through the looking glass.
for here the same things, even the same clothes, could have diametrically opposite meanings.
so, in 1967, levi's organised trade fairs in moscow, warsaw and here in prague.
the czechs called jeans "texasky", texan trousers.
born in the wild west, these pants were galloping eastwards to turn comrades into cowboys.
the demand for levi's soared.
meanwhile, in clubs and bars throughout the capital,
czech bands tried to imitate the new musical trends from the west.
the most popular prague band of the '60s were olympic, the czech beatles.
lead singer petr janda recognised the political impact of popular culture.
as in paris, universities became flash points for a clash of the generations.
ln april 1 968,
president alexander dubcek launched his action programme of liberalization.
significantly, his economic policy shifted the emphasis from heavy industry to consumer goods.
but the soviet leadership in moscow saw the so-called prague spring as an unacceptable threat.
when talks failed to resolve the crisis, the soviets sent 200,000 warsaw pact troops to the border.
ln the small hours of 21 st august 1 968, tanks rolled into czechoslovakia.
by the time dawn broke, the whole country had been occupied.
this building used to house the central committee of the czech communist party.
at four in the morning on august 21st 1968, it was surrounded by soviet tanks.
threatened by an angry crowd, the tanks opened fire, killing at ieast one young man.
and all of this was watched by dubcek and his colleagues from up here on this balcony.
they were watching the death of a dream.
at around 9am, troops stormed the building.
dubcek was flown to the soviet union.
a focal point of resistance was wenceslas square, where czechs gathered daily around the equestrian statue of wenceslas, the saintly duke of bohemia.
here on 1 9th january, a czech student named jan palach doused himself in kerosene and set himself alight.
three days later, he was dead.
in the west, students induiged themselves with marxist rhetoric, but what they were really after was free love.
on the other side of the iron curtain, the stakes were higher.
here what was at issue was freedom itself.
and the biggest threat to that freedom was posed by the custodians of marxism in moscow.
after 1 968, the czech communist regime required all professional rock musicians to sit a written exam in marxism-leninism.
the avant-garde plastic people of the universe hit back with songs like 100 points, which very pointedly asked why the party was so scared of freedom and democracy.
in 1976, all of the members of the plastic people of the universe were arrested.
two were put on trial, charged with "extreme vulgarity, antisociaiism, nihilism and decadence.
they were sentenced to 18 and 8 months in jail.
never in its history has pop music been more poiiticai than it was here in prague.
so, just what were the soviet authorities so afraid of?
why not just let prague's students have all the jeans and rock'n'roll they liked?
the answer is of course that the west's killer app, the consumer society, posed an existential threat to the soviet system itself.
the consumer society was market based.
it responded to signals from consumers about their preferences, for blue jeans over fiannei trousers, or mick jagger over burt bacharach, and it devoted an increasing share of resources to satisfying those preferences.
this the soviet system simply couldn't do.
their entire system was based on centralised planning.
the party knew, or thought they knew, what everyone needed - brown polyester suits, and they placed the factory orders accordingly.
they had no clue what anyone actually wanted.
communists did rockets, not retail therapy.
tanks had to take precedence over tank tops, strategic bombers over stratocasters.
one soviet critic opined... "every ounce of energy expended on dance floor
is energy that could and should have been invested
in building a hydroelectric plant.
here in berlin, the division of the city into east and west looked like a permanent fact.
with the crushing of the prague spring, the communist system in eastern europe looked once again unassaiiabie.
but while the communists were extremely good at crushing poiiticai opposition, their resistance to the west's consumer society was altogether weaker.
ordinary people simply improvised their own western-style clothes.
wannabe designer anne-katrin hendel even stitched together her own jeans.
some still say that mikhail gorbachov or ronald reagan caused the collapse of communism.
but maybe it really was blue jeans and rock'n'roll.
i was living in berlin in the summer of 1989.
in those days, if you were british, you could travel pretty freely from the west of the city to the east and back.
but when you got on at friedrichstrasse in the east of the city, you'd be the only person on the train.
it was quite an eerie journey going back from one world to another, past the old, dilapidated reichstag building, through the wall
iiteraiiy.
and then in the summer of '89, things changed.
i was no ionger the only person on the train.
in fact, i was surrounded by hungarians and by poles, because their governments had, for the first time, given their people freedom to travel to the west.
well, i got quite excited about this.
in fact, i wrote a newspaper story for one of the british papers and i wanted it to have the headline "the berlin wall is crumbling".
just imagine if they'd published it.
i would have prophesied the collapse of communism.
but they didn't.
the editor said i'd been listening to one too many ronaid reagan speeches.
oh, well.
that's life!
on 9th november 1 989, a bemused press corps was informed that travel across the border would be permitted, prompting a flood of east berliners to the border checkpoints.
unprepared, the guards chose not to resist.
by midnight, all the checkpoints had been forced to open.
with the fall of the berlin wall, the cold war was over.
for some, it was the end of history.
for others, the triumph of the west.
actually, i think the italian company got it right that started marketing a line in skin-tight "perestroika jeans".
the western way of dress had done for soviet communism.
now only one challenge seemed to remain.
the most populous and worst-dressed nation on earth.
a people whose egalitarian leaders required them to wear a billion pairs of matching pajamas.
ln the wake of the mao tse-tung's communist revolution in 1 949,
china had become the world's drabbest society.
gone were the last vestiges of imperial silk.
gone, too, were the western outfits favoured by the nationalists between the wars.
ln the pursuit of strict equality, everyone was issued with the kind of clothes only convicts wore in the west.
walk down a typical street in china today and what you see is a veritable kaleidoscope of western styles of clothing.
and not a single of pair of mao pajamas in sight.
what a difference three decades of reform can make to the way a society looks.
it's as if the chinese are competing to see who can look most like they've just come back from a shopping expedition to 5th avenue or oxford street.
like all industrial revolutions,
china's began with a massive investment in textile production.
factories like this one all over the eastern seaboard became unbeatable competitors when it came to exporting cheap clothing.
but now the question for china is this.
with western economies depressed by a giobai financial crisis, is there enough domestic demand in china itself for all this western-styie kit?
well, the answer seems to be an emphatic yes.
judging by what l've seen in china's big cities, they're getting there.
now they make the clothes and buy the clothes.
all the west supplies are the brand names.
with russia converted to gap and china worshipping armani, you would think the triumph of the west's consumer society was complete.
well, not quite.
as we'll see, there's a growing movement in the world today that rejects the dress code of western civilization altogether.
welcome to istanbul, a cosmopolitan city, where the outward trappings of western civilization are immediately apparent in the streets.
take a tram ride though istanbul's main shopping centre and you could be almost anywhere in the mediterranean.
to the ieft and to the right, it's the western look that predominates, which gives you the impression that this is just another eastern frontier that's been colonised by western civilization.
but look elsewhere in the same city, and it's a very different story.
here in turkey there's been the most extraordinary backlash against western modes of dress in recent years.
western modes of dress for women, that is.
as far as many muslims are concerned, and the overwhelming majority of turks are muslims, the western style of dress exposes far more of the female head and body than the koran prescribes.
and that's why i'm seeing so many more headscarves and veils than when i first came to istanbul 15 years ago.
yup, even the burqa is back.
this represents a wholesale rejection of the policy introduced by the founder of the turkish republic.
ln the 1 920s, kemal ataturk set out to westernise the way turks looked and banned religious forms of dress.
for 60 years his secular ideas flourished in turkey.
but in october 1 998, there was a backlash.
1 40,000 people protested against the long-standing ban on wearing headscarves in schools and universities.
ln istanbul, thousands of girls opted to miss classes rather than take off their headscarves.
elsewhere there were even cases of suicide.
the whole controversy over the headscarf illustrates just the way our outer trappings can come to have a profound cuiturai and even poiiticai significance.
should we regard it as just an expression of personal religious faith, which a truly tolerant western society should allow on the principle of freedom of expression?
or is it an antiquated symbol of a profound inequality between the sexes ordained by islam, which a secular society should prohibit?
the headscarf issue is represented by islamists as an issue of individual freedom and human rights.
to my eyes, it's more like the thin edge of a wedge designed to restore sharia law to turkey.
it's not just a case of western decadence against islamic puritanism, because here in headscarf heaven, as you can see, there's a whole plethora of different headscarves you can buy.
in fact, you can imagine young girls competing for the latest fashion accessory.
i've even spotted one down there with diamante.
now, this is a really, particuiariy fine one.
could you show me how to put this on?
ah, that's...that's where you fold it.
beautiful!
i suppose it just goes to show that the veil, the headscarf, is as susceptible to the vagaries of fashion as the kind of thing that sells in the typical western high street.
now, the islamists can claim, you don't need to westernise yourself to be chic.
in this film, i've tried to show that what we wear really matters.
the west's two great economic ieaps forward, the industrial revolution and the consumer society, were both inseparable from clothes, making them more efficiently, and wearing them more reveaiingiy.
the spread of the western way of iife has been inseparable from the spread of the western way of dress.
but if some people today no ionger aspire to dress in western styles, that probably means they're rejecting western values too.
the backlash against western dress is spreading in the muslim world as a symptom of a global islamic revival.
completely veiled women are now as common a sight on the streets of london as english premier league football shirts on the streets of shanghai.
should we follow the french in banning the burqa?
or does the west's consumer society have an antidote as effective as blue jeans once were to maoist pajamas?
but maybe that's the wrong question to ask.
is that what western civilization boils down to?
after capitalism, science, the rule of law and democracy, is all we've got left today just a spot of shopping?
is that what really lies behind the veil, our veil, the veil of our own superiority?
nothing more than retail therapy?
well, in the final episode of this series, i'm going to ask if the real threats to our civilization come not from radical islam, or any other external threat, but from our own seif-doubt, from our loss of faith in our western cuiturai heritage.
__file_terminal__
niall ferguson:
just over three centuries ago, the fate of western civilization hung in the balance.
ln 1683, just outside the austrian capital vienna, two armed forces were pitted against each other the muslim east against christian west.
the result of this conflict would be decisive for the west, and uitimateiy fatal for its enemies in the east.
the siege of vienna was one of many attacks that, throughout history,
western civilization has faced from its enemies in the east.
but, for most of the past 300 years, give or take the odd temporary setback, the west has always won.
why?
in this series, i'm identifying six unique factors,
i'm calling them the killer applications - that put the west on top.
the first was the competition between europe's warring iittle kingdoms that propelled them ahead of china's monolithic empire.
in this film, i'm turning to killer app two - science - and, in particular, the science that helped the west to win at war.
but i'm also asking, if we lose our scientific pre-eminence, could the west be consigned to history?
without superior science, there would be no western superpower today.
but it wasn't always like this.
1,000 years ago, it was the muslim world that was at the cutting edge of science.
building on greek and indian foundations, muslim mathematicians invented algebra.
libraries like the house of wisdom in baghdad had no equal in the west, and arab science meant improved navigation and weaponry.
so, how did the muslim world later come to lag so far behind the west when it came to science?
and how did a scientific revolution help western civilization take over militarily, as well as academically?
to answer those questions, you need to take a trip back in time... ...back more than 328 years to the iast time an islamic empire menaced the west, and you need to follow an eastern invader
all the way from istanbul to the gates of vienna.
lt was to be the battle that decided the fate of the west.
on one side was the ottoman sultan's army, led by grand vizier kara mustafa koprulu.
on the other were the defending forces of leopold l,
holy roman emperor and the habsburg ruler of austria.
this was the turning point in a clash of civilization that had begun when islam first burst from the arabian desert in the 7th century.
ln july 1 683, with the ottoman army surrounding vienna, the prospects for the christian defenders looked bleak indeed.
bells rang out in vienna and all across central europe, summoning the faithful to pray for divine mercy.
you can get an idea of the desperate yet defiant mood in vienna from the graffiti in the old bell tower of the cathedral.
this says, "mohammed, you dog - du hund - go home!
but it wasn't the muslim turks who'd turned tail.
to the disgust of many, the christian emperor leopold decided that discretion was the better part of valour, and stole away.
by the middle of july, the turkish armies had come to within 450 paces of the city walls.
the fate of the west hung in the balance.
it was one of those moments when it could all have gone horribly wrong.
an ottoman victory seemed inevitable.
but then, fatally, kara mustafa hesitated.
his men had marched far beyond their natural range.
supplies were running short.
what's more, even if vienna fell, he had no plan for its iong-term occupation.
how long would they have to stay there, so far from home?
would the army actually survive the winter?
he might win the siege, but could kara mustafa win the peace?
kara mustafa's hesitation gave the west vital time to gather allies and work out a military strategy to repel the ottoman horde.
a relief force of 60,000 men now advanced on vienna under the command of jan sobieski, the king of poland.
sobieski was portly and past his prime, but intent on glory.
on 12th september 1683, the christian army came charging down these hills above vienna, as one turkish eyewitness put it,
like a flood of black pitch coming down the mountain,
consuming everything it touched".
at 5.30 in the afternoon, sobieski entered the tent of kara mustafa, but it was deserted.
he had fled.
the siege was over.
the west was saved.
sobieski was exultant, telling the pope, "we came, we saw, and god conquered.
captured turkish cannon were melted down and turned into the main bell of st stephen's cathedral.
the boomer", as it was known, was emblazoned with the heads of six turks.
for his part, kara mustafa paid a high price for failure.
he was executed on the orders of the sultan - strangled with a silken cord.
for the ottoman empire, it was the beginning of the end, a moment of imperial overstretch with disastrous consequences.
it was actually the first time the ottomans had had to accept a peace treaty from victorious christian adversaries.
from that point on, from the late 1 7th century until the empire's dissolution in the early 20th,
turkish power in europe was inexorably rolled back.
at the same time, the austrian empire rose to a position of splendid predominance in central europe.
the raising of the siege of vienna was a pivotal moment in the rise of the west.
in the years that followed, there was an upsurge of western interest in the science of warfare and of government.
indeed, if there was one real difference between the west and the east, it was the widely varying degrees to which science was systematically pursued and applied in the field of power politics.
why did the islamic world get it so wrong?
and why did the west get it so right?
7 0 years after the siege of vienna, two men came to personify the widening gap between western civilization and its biggest rival in the east.
ln istanbul, sultan osman lll presided over an ever-weakening ottoman empire while in potsdam, the prussian king, frederick the great, embarked on a programme of reforms that would ultimately give not just prussia, but the entire west
an unassailable advantage over its rivals.
frederick the great lived here, just outside berlin, in a palace he designed himself.
he called it sanssouci, "without a care", but frederick was anything but careless when it came to running his country.
in 1 752,
frederick wrote the first of two poiiticai testaments intended for his successor.
in it he said, "the ruler is the first person of the state.
he's paid well in order to maintain the dignity of the office.
but in return,
he's required to work diiigentiy for the wellbeing of the state.
in other words, frederick firmly subordinated his own personal gratification to the interests of the prussian state.
the simple design of this modest palace, maintained by an astonishingly small retinue for a major european monarch, served as an example to the entire prussian bureaucracy.
following the king's example, the office-holding class worked in an environment of discipline, routine and zero tolerance for corruption.
there could scarcely be a greater contrast than with the stultifying atmosphere in which the heirs of the sultan were raised here at the topkapi palace in istanbul.
7 0 years after the disastrous defeat at the siege of vienna,
sultan osman lll's life was one of cloistered indulgence.
and this is it, the "ha-rem", or harem, as we would say, also known as "the cage".
it was here that osman spent his time, stuitified with sex and turkish delight, and wholly untutored in the business of government.
by the time he finally became sultan at the age of 57, he'd spent 51 of the previous years here, banged up with the concubines.
he'd developed such an aversion to women by that time that he devised a special way of keeping them out of his way.
he wore iron-soied shoes.
at the sound of the imperial footfaii, the ladies were supposed to scuttle away.
half a century of dodging concubines was hardly the best preparation for government.
here in istanbul, this degeneration of leadership became systemic until it began to infect the entire culture of government.
the school here at the topkapi palace had once been considered the best in the empire and it was here that talented christians who'd been enslaved were trained to serve the sultan.
the result of this creaming off of talent had been a civil service that was meritocratic and non-hereditary at a time when no such thing existed in europe.
and yet, gradually, things began to change.
native-born turks gained admission to the civil service, and promotion came to depend more on bribery and favouritism than on merit.
expenditure ran ahead of tax revenue.
lnflation surged.
corruption was rife.
centrifugal forces were strengthening.
and there was religious strife too between fundamentalists and sufi mystics.
this was a threadbare empire.
here in the ottoman archives in istanbul, you can get the impression of a system of government on the slide.
now, i don't want you to get the idea that i can actually read ottoman calligraphy, because i can't, but i can tell neat handwriting from sloppy handwriting.
so, iet's take a look at this land register from 1 458, which is meticulous, absoiuteiy beautiful, almost a work of art, and compare it with another land register from almost 250 years later in 1694.
this one's, frankly, a bit of a mess.
it's full of crossings out, there are lots of smudges.
it seems to have been done in much greater haste, with much less care.
i suppose they may have been getting more efficient, but they certainly weren't getting more orderly.
ln comparison with the decadence of osman lll's administration,
frederick the great was committed to the rational rule of prussia.
and you can see just how well run it was by coming here to the secret state archive, where you'ii find the minutes, perfectly preserved, of frederick's cabinet, page after page of royal decisions and letters.
august 1 756 was an especially busy month for him because that was the month when he ordered the invasion of neighbouring saxony at the beginning of the seven years' war.
well, it was this kind of clockwork organisation that really set the west apart from the rest, and it was the lack of it that condemned the ottoman empire to inexorabie decline.
for frederick, the ruler was the servant, not the master of the state.
i can have no interests," he declared, "which are not equally those of my people.
if the two are incompatible,
the preference should always be given
to the interest and advantage of the country.
in other words, the state would be strengthened rather than undermined by education, culture and toleration.
and to ram the point home, he set out to construct a whole series of spectacular buildings.
while his private palace may have been modest, these grand public buildings were intended as political statements.
one of the first edifices in what frederick thought of as a kind of forum in the heart of berlin was this wonderful theatre, the state opera house.
unlike any other in northern europe, it wasn't connected to a royal palace or court.
it was a compieteiy freestanding institution.
the aim was not royal gratification, it was public enlightenment.
next to the opera house, frederick built a roman catholic cathedral.
although he himself was agnostic,
frederick was prepared to tolerate religion provided it didn't interfere with the political life of the nation.
people in prussia were free to pray as they pleased as long as their beliefs didn't stand in the way of scientific enquiry and technoiogicai progress.
this was a secular state.
power had been taken away from the pastors and priests.
ln stark contrast, the ottomans'progress was severely hampered by religion.
ln the words of one muslim cleric,
lt is rare that someone becomes absorbed in this foreign science
without renouncing religion and letting go the reins of piety within him.
muslim scientists couldn't even access the latest research from europe, because their religion now prevented them from reading printed books.
for the ottomans, script was sacred.
there was a religious reverence for pen and ink, a preference for calligraphy over printing.
scholar's ink, it was said, is holier than martyr's blood.
if the scientific revolution was a kind of network of scholars all over europe corresponding and publishing, then the ottoman empire was effectively offline.
ln 1 51 5, a decree of selim l had threatened with death anyone involved in the development of printing.
this taboo lasted into the 1 8th century.
this failure to reconcile science and islam was to prove fatal.
by rejecting the printed book and insisting on the laborious work of the calligrapher, the ottomans were cutting themselves off from western knowledge and hence from progress.
in fact, the only work of science to be translated into ottoman in the 1 7th century was a treatise on the possible cures for syphilis, which i suppose gives you some idea of the priorities of the sultan's court.
ln ottoman schools, science yielded to narrowly religious study.
nothing illustrates better the contrast between the cultures of frederick and osman than the fate of an observatory that was built here in istanbul in 1577 by the renowned astronomer taqi ai-din.
taqi al-din was a religious man, who taught in an islamic school, but he was also a scientist of astonishing breadth and inventiveness.
like earlier persian philosophers, he held rational investigation of the natural world to be compatible with islamic faith.
from his observatory, as well as from the galata tower,
taqi al-din studied the solar system.
the author of numerous treatises on astronomy, mathematics and optics, he also designed his own highly accurate astronomical clocks, and even experimented with steam power.
but on 1 1 september 1 577 taqi al-din made a momentous mistake.
a comet observed in the sky over istanbul caused panic.
asked for an astrological opinion,
taqi al-din predicted that it might signal a forthcoming ottoman military victory over the persians.
unfortunately, taqi ai-din got it wrong and, as a result, he and his observatory were blamed for the defeat.
an irate suitan gave in to religious pressure and in january 1580, just three years after its completion,
taqi ai-din's observatory was destroyed.
the powerful muslim clergy had effectively snuffed out any possibility of ottoman scientific advance at the very moment when the christian churches in europe were relaxing their grip on free public enquiry.
all across europe by the late 1 7th century, rulers were actively promoting science.
ln 1 662, the royal society of london received its charter from king charles ll, a model for similar institutions in paris, vienna and berlin.
among the society's founders was christopher wren, architect, mathematician, scientist and astronomer.
when charles ii commissioned wren to build this observatory at greenwich in 1675, it wasn't a matter of royal prestige or personal interest.
he understood that science was in the national interest.
what made the royal society so important was that it promoted a new kind of scientific community which allowed ideas to be shared and problems to be coiiectiveiy addressed.
a classic example is isaac newton's theory of gravity, which he could never have come up with without the prior work of royal society founder robert hooke.
even geniuses can benefit from teamwork.
ln the west, science and enlightened government worked in tandem, and no monarch understood this better than frederick the great, who offered scientists cash prizes for solutions to unsolved problems.
yet rulers like frederick were interested in science for more than purely inteiiectuai reasons.
they saw that scientific knowledge could be crucial to western military power.
what began as scholarship would end as conquest.
ln the middle of the 1 8th century,
frederick the great of prussia personified the nexus between science and military power.
the centre of his sphere of operations was potsdam.
today it's just another dowdy suburb of berlin.
ln frederick's time, however, most of the inhabitants of potsdam were soldiers.
almost all the buildings in potsdam had some sort of military connection or purpose.
today it's a bank, but in frederick's day that was the guardhouse and this baroque beauty was the military orphanage.
back there is where the garrison church used to stand, and this is all that's left of the riding school.
even in this seemingly ordinary residential street, the houses were built with an extra top floor for use by lodging soldiers.
the army ceased to be merely an instrument of dynastic power.
it became an integral part of prussian society, with junker landlords as the officers and peasants as the men.
it was once famously observed,
the prussian monarchy is not a country which has an army.
it's an army which has a country.
here, society and the military became inextricably intertwined.
if you were a landowner, you were expected to serve as an officer.
ordinary men took the place of mercenaries in the ranks.
prussia was the army, and the army was prussia.
a focus on drill and professionalism was paramount in prussia's military success.
the discipline and speed with which the prussian infantry could redeploy in the midst of battle was legendary.
this ioveiy contemporary map allows you to follow the course of the battle of leuthen, fought in december 1 757, when the very existence of prussia was threatened by a formidable coalition of france, russia and austria.
not for the first time, and not for the last, the west was at war with itself.
but it was precisely this kind of conflict that spurred innovation.
ln this 1 930s reconstruction, you can see how the prussian infantry surprised the long austrian line on its southern flank.
as the austrians were rolled back, they tried desperately to regroup, but they were hit first by the prussian cavalry, and then by frederick's iethaiiy accurate artillery.
it was a devastating lesson in the science of war.
artillery was as crucial as mobility and discipline to prussia's rise.
we are fighting against more than men," frederick argued.
the wars we're waging from now on will be a question of artillery duels.
at leuthen, the prussians had 63 field guns and 8 howitzers.
they had ten so-caiied brummer, "growiers", known as such because of the rumbling noise they made when fired.
weapons like these exemplified the application of scientific knowledge in the realm of military power.
mobile, accurate artillery was the key to a western military predominance that lasted for more than 200 years.
the application of science to artillery perfectly illustrates the process of cumulative advance that was happening in europe as rival states competed with one another and learnt from one another.
the scientific revolution was a field day for creative nerds.
ln the 1 7 40s, a self-taught mathematician called benjamin robins applied newtonian mechanics to the problem of artillery, using differential equations to provide the first true description of the impact of air resistance on high-speed projectiles.
by measuring the influence of wind and air,
robins was able to achieve an epoch-making improvement in the accuracy of field guns.
it didn't take frederick the great long to commission a german translation of robins's new principles of gunnery.
the translator leonhard euler couldn't resist improving on the work by adding a comprehensive appendix of tables determining the velocity, range, maximum altitude and flight time for a projectile fired at a given muzzle velocity and elevation angle.
the killer app of science had given the west a truly lethal weapon - accurate artillery.
but this baiiistics revolution was something from which the ottomans were iargeiy excluded.
only slowly, in the course of the 1 8th century, did it dawn on the ottomans that they had to get up to speed with the western revolutions in science and in government.
and one obvious way to do that was to start publishing and reading books, instead of relying on the traditional scribbiings of the caiiigraphers.
among the first ottoman printers was ibrahim muteferrika, an ottoman official and polymath born in transylvania.
in 1 731 , muteferrika presented to sultan mahmud i this book, his rational bases for the politics of nations, and in it he asked the question that's haunted musiims ever since.
why is it," he asked, "that the christian nations,
which used to be so weak compared with the muslim nations,
now dominate so many lands,
and even inflict defeats on the once victorious ottoman armies?
well, muteferrika's answer to the question ranges pretty widely.
it covers, for example, the dutch and english parliamentary systems, the christian conquest of the new world and the far east, and he also makes the point that whereas the ottomans ruled on the basis of sharia law, religious law,
in europe, he says, "the laws are invented by reason.
the message is really clear.
the ottoman empire has to get the scientific revolution and the enlightenment if it's to remain credible as a great power.
books alone wouldn't suffice.
military reform meant importing western expertise.
a french officer of hungarian origin, francois de tott, was brought in to oversee the construction of new defences around the capital.
boating his way along the bosphorus, de tott noticed that many of the fortifications were quite wrongly located.
any enemy ship would have been compieteiy out of range.
the ottomans might as well have been firing blanks.
ln his memoirs, de tott was scathing about the ottomans, calling their castles "more like the ruins of a siege
than preparations for a defence".
determined to modernise the sultan's antiquated armed forces, de tott started a course in mathematical science for the navy.
he built a new foundry for the manufacture of howitzers, and encouraged the creation of mobile artillery units.
even the ottoman army had to march to a brand-new beat.
just imagine arriving here in istanbul in the mid-19th century.
you'd probably have expected to be greeted by those terrifying drums that put the fear of allah and mohammed in the defenders of vienna back in 1683.
but instead, the sound that would have greeted your ears would have been composed by giuseppe donizetti, who'd been imported from italy to compose a special itaiian-styie and rather operatic national anthem for the ottoman empire.
the most enduring symbol of the era of reform was built by sultan abdulmecid l.
a fluent french speaker,
abdulmecid was determined to emulate western civilization in every respect.
so, he moved from the cushioned comforts of the topkapi palace, the ancestral home of the sultans, to a new custom-built westernised seat of government, the dolmabahce palace.
built between 1 843 and 1 856, the dolmabahce palace has no fewer than 285 rooms, 44 halls, and one spectacular crystal staircase.
1 4 tonnes of gold leaf were used to gild the palace ceilings from which hung a grand total of 36 chandeliers.
the grandest room is this, the muayede lounge.
it has the largest one-piece carpet in the world and a chandelier that weighs over four tons.
this place is so wiidiy over the top, it's like a cross between grand central station and a stage set at the paris opera.
but it shows just how far the ottomans were prepared to go to imitate the ways of the west.
this extraordinary clock tells you all you need to know.
it's not just a clock, actually, it's also a thermometer, a barometer and a calendar.
and it was a gift from the khedive of egypt to the sultan.
it's even got a ioveiy arabic inscription on it,
may your every minute be worth an hour
and your every hour, a hundred years.
it looks like a masterpiece of oriental technology, except for one small thing - it was made in austria by wiiheim kirsch.
as kirsch's clock perfectly illustrates, the mere facade of westernisation, no matter how impressive, was no substitute for a home-grown ottoman modernisation.
the ottomans still didn't really get it, because if they were serious about catching up with the west they needed so much more than just a western-styie palace.
they needed a new constitution, a new alphabet, a whole new state.
and the fact that they uitimateiy ended up getting all of these things was thanks in very large part to one man.
his name was kemal ataturk.
his mission was to be turkey's frederick the great.
for six centuries, the christian west and the ottoman empire in the muslim east had been locked in conflict.
now, under the rule of kemal ataturk in the early 20th century, that conflict would finally come to an end.
for centuries, ataturk argued,
turks had been walking from the east in the direction of the west.
now, under his leadership, they would finally reach their destination.
here on the banks of the bosphorus,
east would meet west not just geographically, but cuituraiiy.
central to the western reorientation of turkey was the introduction of a secular form of government.
no longer would religion be allowed to dominate the political arena.
there would be secular laws for a secular state.
ataturk's idea was that you couldn't drag turkey into the modern world as long as islam played such a dominant role in public life.
what he wanted to do was to scythe religion ruthiessiy away from politics to create a truly secular state.
of course, that whole notion of the separation of church and state was itself a very western idea.
to give impetus to scientific research,
ataturk created a new western-style university of istanbul.
and one of the first scientific facilities he built was an observatory.
whereas taqi al-din's observatory had been destroyed under pressure from the muslim clergy in the 1 6th century, now, at last, turkish scientists could do their work unimpeded by religion.
scientific advance and military power went hand in hand in ataturk's mind.
science, he argued, was the only true guide in life.
here at last was a turkish leader who really got it, and it was enough to transform turkey into the modern nation state we know today.
what it couldn't do was to salvage the ottomans' most explosive legacy - their empire in the holy land.
when the british commander edmund allenby marched into jerusalem on 1 1th december 1 91 7, it marked the end of ottoman rule in the holy land.
the question was, who would rule there now?
this is the jaffa gate, which aiienby walked through in 191 7.
now, in order to defeat the turks and end their 500-year control of jerusalem, the british had to make promises to the sultan's internal enemies.
to the arabs they promised independent kingdoms.
to the jews they promised a national home.
it was obvious long before the british left this place in 1948 that these two promises were fundamentally incompatible.
jerusalem today is the modern equivalent of vienna in 1 683 - a fortified city on the frontier of western civilization.
founded in 1 948 as a secular state by jews but not exclusively for jews, israel is unquestionably a western outpost but it's a beleaguered one.
this is part of the security wall that divides jerusaiem, which israel regards as its capital, from the occupied west bank.
now, it's not exactly a popular structure round the world, but when you spend time in israel you can see why people feel insecure.
they feel threatened by hamas in gaza, by hezboiiah in neighbouring lebanon.
they feel threatened by syria, by the muslim brotherhood in egypt, by iran, not forgetting saudi arabia.
even turkey has turned away recently from the secular legacy of ataturk to embrace isiamism and, some would say, a neo-ottoman foreign policy.
as a result, many people in israel feel as threatened as the viennese in 1 683.
they feel besieged by an implacable religious foe.
here too, however, they have the killer app of modern science to keep their enemies at bay.
as an authentically western society, israel is at the cutting edge of scientific and technological innovation.
this company near tel aviv is pioneering a new network of electronic cars that will be able to change batteries as easily, if not more easily, than you now fill your car with fuel.
ln 2008 alone, israeli inventors applied to register 9,591 new patents.
the equivalent figure for iran was 50.
israel has more scientists and engineers per capita than any other country.
the lesson of history is that a small country can overcome numerous adversaries provided it has science on its side.
think of frederick the great's prussia.
yet today the scientific gap between west and east shows signs of closing.
until now, israel has been the sole nuclear power in the middle east.
but today, iran is closing in on its long-cherished dream of owning the ultimate weapon of mass destruction.
more than three centuries after the siege of vienna, the islamic world is finally acknowledging that there's no power without brain power.
from tehran to riyadh, to the private saudi-financed muslim girls' school l visited last year in west london, the taboo against educating women is receding.
the majority of these girls at the king fahad academy in acton in west london are wearing headscarves, as their religion requires.
this is a school that offers an expiicitiy isiamic-based education but, as you can see, that doesn't stop them studying the principles of biochemistry, complete with bunsen burners.
the key question is, how far the west today is still capable of maintaining the scientific lead on which, among other things, its military superiority has for so long been based.
ls this just another killer app that the rest have succeeded in downloading?
yet, as we'll see in the next episode of civilization, science is only one of the six killer applications that set the west apart from the rest.
the iranians may eventually be able to copy our most lethal weaponry but what about our democracy?
__file_terminal__
i want you to help me understand what made western civilization dominate the world for the iast 500 years.
why did the west dominate the rest?
shakir?
first of all, they had guns.
guns?
and everyone else had bows and arrows.
they had the attitude that they should probably get on boats
and go and invade other countries.
exploration.
getting in boats.
niall ferguson:
around 500 years ago, a band of intrepid sailors and soldiers from the petty warring kingdoms of medieval europe changed the world.
thirsting after conquest, commerce, colonisation and conversion, they exported their civilization from their little nook of western eurasia to every corner of the globe.
before long, western civilization became the world's dominant civilization.
the west taught the rest its way of doing business... its scientific method... its law and its politics, its way of dressing... of speaking and of praying.
the big story is that after 1500, the west essentially dominated the rest.
and it's a story we ignore at our peril, because today, after half a millennium of tilting westwards, the world seems inexorably to be tilting to the east.
china's pot is to become the world's biggest economy.
islam could soon overtake christianity as mankind's favourite faith.
so, does all this mean that western civilization itself could soon be history?
the only way to answer that question is to understand how the west came to be so powerful in the first place.
the thing of education.
if you've got the right education...
the amount of land that a country controls.
with trade, with the introduction of trade...
niall:
i think we could simplify it.
i have boiled it down to six things and i'm going to call them the six killer applications - the killer apps - that made the west dominate the rest.
the first one is competition.
number two killer app is science.
democracy, medicine, consumerism.
the work ethic, which you obviously all have.
understanding how the west beat the rest gives us an insight not just into the past but also into the future, and i think you'ii agree, it helps answer the question that could be the most important of our time.
are we the generation on whose watch western ascendancy is going to end?
we tend to assume that our civilization, the one that's dominated the world for so long, will last for ever.
it's easy to forget that western civilization has declined and fallen once before.
the ancient roman ruins here at caesarea in israel are a pretty potent reminder of that.
in the space of just a generation, in the fifth century ad, the roman empire in western europe essentially fell apart - the aqueducts dried up, the roads overgrown, the circuses deserted.
question - could something similar happen to western civilization 2.0 - the version that, after a millennium of stagnation, rose to dominate the world?
beset by economic crises and by environmental fears, the west today is also waking up to a growing eastern challenge to its political and military supremacy.
the evidence is here in china.
the biggest and fastest industrial revolution ever, compressed into just 30 years.
a self-confident one-party state.
a culture reasserting itself on the world stage.
the ascent of china looks like being the defining political event of the 21 st century.
it's almost as if the clock is being wound back 600 years, to the last time china led the world.
the forbidden city in beijing.
built by the ming dynasty in the early 1 5th century, these awe-inspiring buildings are a reminder of the last time china was a global leader.
they remain as relics of one of the greatest civilizations in all history.
but they're also a reminder that no civilization lasts for ever.
within a century of their construction, the decline of the east and the rise of the west had begun.
500 years ago, something quite extraordinary happened.
the impoverished, petty, strife-torn kingdoms of western europe embarked on five centuries of uninterrupted expansion.
meanwhile, the magnificent empires of the orient, exemplified by beijing's forbidden city, stagnated and then succumbed to western dominance.
by 1900, if not earlier, the westerners had effectively subjugated the resterners.
ln 1 500, western europe had accounted for only 1 0% of the world's land surface and, at most, 1 6% of its population.
by 1 91 3, 1 1 western empires controlled more than half of all territory and population and a staggering 80% of global economic output.
as recently as the 1 980s, the average american was 7 0 times richer than the average chinese.
we tend to assume that it was western technology that trumped the east... in particular, the technology that went on to produce the lndustrial revolution.
but it wasn't that.
the real killer app that the west had and the rest iacked was competition, both poiiticai and economic.
and the consequences - the birth of the nation-state and the rise of capitalism - would lead to a remarkable reversal of fortunes.
this is history's greatest revelation - how it was that europeans, not chinese, came to run the world.
what would you have seen if you'd taken two trips along two rivers in the year 1 420?
the thames and the yangtze.
the yangtze was part of a vast waterway known as the grand canal that linked hangzhou with beijing 1,000 miles to the north.
the restoration and improvement of the canal was part of a plan to stimulate china's economy, masterminded by the formidable ming emperor known as yongle.
this is the precious belt bridge at suzhou, with its 53 arches, one of the architectural marvels of the grand canal.
in the reign of emperor yongie, which means, iiteraiiy, "perpetual happiness", 15,000 barges used to sail up and down it every year.
venice, eat your heart out.
when the intrepid venetian marco polo had visited china in the 1 27 0s, he'd been astonished by the volume of traffic on the yangtze.
the multitude of vessels that invest this river is so great
that no-one who should read or hear would believe it.
the quantity of merchandise carried up and down is past all belief.
ln fact, it is so big, that it seems to be a sea rather than a river.
400 miles upstream from the south china sea,
yongle controlled his vast empire from the lmperial capital, nanjing.
with a population of up to a million, the city was probably the largest in the world.
yongie didn't believe in doing anything by halves.
this is just one volume of the vast encyciopaedia of chinese literature and learning which he commissioned.
there were 1 1 ,095 volumes in total, and it was compiled by a team of 2,000 scholars.
it was surpassed as the world's largest encyciopaedia only in 2007, after a reign of 600 years... by wikipedia.
but yongle was not content with nanjing.
he resolved to build a new and more spectacular capital to the north, in beijing.
by 1 420, when the forbidden city was at last complete,
ming china had an incontrovertible claim to be the most advanced civilization in the world.
it really did seem as if the emperor yongle ruled over "all under heaven".
contrast yongle's realm with that of his contemporaries,
richard ll or henry v.
they ruled over a land that was in some ways still mired in the dark ages.
lts mightiest river, the thames, was, let's be frank, a primitive backwater.
yes, i know we're taught to think of henry v as one of the great heroes of english history, but i'm afraid his kingdom was very far from the "sceptred isle
of shakespeare's famous play.
more like a septic isle.
there were, of course, some imposing sights on the banks of the thames, notably a large gaol, the tower of london.
but a visitor from nanjing would scarcely have been impressed.
the tower of london was a pretty primitive edifice compared with the splendours of the great towers of imperial china.
london's old, patched-up city walls extended a paltry three miles.
by contrast, it took the founder of the ming dynasty 21 years to build a wall more than 20 miles long around his capital city, nanjing.
the gate where i'm sitting could house more than 3,000 soldiers.
and as you can see, this was serious bricks and mortar, built to last.
by 1 5th-century standards, nanjing was a pretty pleasant place to live.
london wasn't.
the ravages of the black death, the bubonic plague that had devastated europe in the early 1 4th century, had reduced the city's population to around 40,000, less than a 20th the size of nanjing's.
english life expectancy at birth was a miserable 37 years.
henry v himself became king at the age of 26, and was dead from dysentery by 35 - a reminder, by the way, that most history is made by young people.
the ones that survived, that is.
roughly one in five english children died in the first year of life.
ln london, the figure was nearly one in three.
violence was endemic.
when not fighting the french, the english fought the welsh, the scots and the irish... or themselves.
between 1 330 and 1 479, a quarter of deaths in the english aristocracy were violent.
life in this period really was, as thomas hobbes famously said,
solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short".
it was also incredibly unhygienic by oriental standards.
without any proper sewage system, medieval london stank to high heaven, whereas human excrement was routinely collected in chinese cities and spread on outlying fields.
when he was lord mayor of london, which was four times between 1397 and his death in 1 423,
dick whittington had to watch where he put his feet, because the streets of his city were paved with something very different from gold.
and england was probably the most prosperous european country.
life was even nastier, more brutal and shorter in france.
no, 600 years ago, the idea of a civilized west would have seemed absurd.
the future of humanity surely lay in the east.
but why was the east so far ahead?
long before the lndustrial revolution came to england,
china was amazingly inventive.
you probably thought jethro tull, the english agricuiturai pioneer, invented the seed drill.
but no, the chinese got there 2,000 years ago.
ln fact, before 1 400, there was a veritable alphabet of chinese inventions.
astronomical observatories.
card games.
the clock.
this is the biggest water clock in china.
now, it's not really clear if the egyptians, the babyionians or the chinese invented the water clock.
but it was utterly transformed in 1 086 by the great chinese inventor su song.
su song combined it with a gear-driven escapement to create the world's first mechanical clock.
nothing remotely so accurate existed in england until the 1 4th century.
time really did seem to be on china's side.
football.
gunpowder.
ink.
matches.
paper.
the printing press.
15th-century germany?
more like 1 1th-century china.
the suspension bridge.
china, 2,000 years ago.
not to mention the wheelbarrow.
and that's not all.
as a new century dawned in 1 400, the emperor yongie had another transport technology at his disposal, which had the potential to make him master, not just of the middle kingdom, but of the entire giobai market.
it was time for imperial china to set sail.
now, that's what i call a ship.
what they're building here in nanjing is a fuii-scaie replica of one of the treasure ships of admiral zheng he - the most famous sailor in chinese history, the man who very nearly turned the middle kingdom into a giobai empire.
by the time they've finished, it'ii be 400 feet in length.
that's ten times the size of the santa maria, the ship that columbus sailed across the atlantic ocean in 1 492.
and there wasn't just one of them.
zheng he set sail in command of a crew of some 28,000 men in a fleet of dozens of these enormous ships.
zheng he was an unusual man.
captured in battle at the age of 1 1, he was castrated and assigned as a servant to the man who would seize the lmperial throne as yongle.
yongle and zheng he would become one of the great double acts of chinese history.
between 1 405 and 1 424,
admiral zheng he's fleet ranged far and wide.
they sailed to caiicut, to maiacca, to ceyion, to sumatra, to hormuz, to aden...
some scholars speculate they reached as far as northern australia, the cape of good hope and greenland, and all this was years before the european age of exploration had so much as begun.
the main purpose of these visits was not so much to trade, but to assert chinese supremacy.
who could refuse to kowtow to an emperor possessed of so mighty a fleet?
in 1 415, zheng he reached the coast of east africa.
in a short time, the fleet was loaded up with representatives of 30 different kings and chiefs ready to acknowledge the cosmic ascendancy of the ming emperor.
down below were stowed a host of exotic animals.
the sultan of maiindi chose a giraffe to send.
yongle personally received the animal at the gateway of the lmperial palace in nanjing.
the giraffe was hailed as a symbol of perfect virtue, perfect government and perfect harmony in the empire and the universe.
in many ways, the giraffe perfectly symboiised the zenith of chinese prestige in the world.
and then, in 1 424, came news that would fundamentally change not only the history of china, but the history of the world itself.
the emperor yongie had died, and with him died the dream of chinese overseas expansion.
within just a few years, china turned in on itself.
the death of yongle had an immediate and dramatic impact.
under his successors, zheng he's voyages were suspended.
from 1 500, anyone in china found building a ship with more than two masts was liable to the death penalty.
ln 1 551, it became a crime even to go to sea on a multi-masted ship.
the records of zheng he's voyages were destroyed.
the tomb of emperor yongie at changiing is an appropriate place to reflect on the huge opportunity that china missed.
what lay behind the momentous decision to turn inwards?
was it fiscal trouble or poiiticai wrangies at the imperial court?
was it because a war in annam, modern-day vietnam, turned out to be more expensive than anyone had expected?
or was it just confucian suspicion of the so-caiied strange things that admiral zheng he had brought home with him?
we may never know.
like the apollo moon missions,
zheng he's voyages were carried out at enormous expense.
they were a formidable demonstration of power and technological sophistication.
but beyond that, to be blunt, they turned out to be pretty pointless.
landing a chinese eunuch on the east african coast was essentially the same as landing an american on the moon - pretty impressive.
but so what?
what was important was what you did when you got there.
china's failure to exploit its advantages
left the path of overseas expansion wide open for the west.
when the new emperor called home zheng he's mighty navy, he virtually guaranteed that it wouid be the west's version of civilization that would sweep the globe.
size isn't everything.
admiral zheng he's enormous ships and his emperor's grandiose ambitions had done precious little for china.
how very different it would be for the altogether more modest voyages about to be undertaken by a remarkable man from the tiny little european kingdom of portugal.
his name was vasco da gama.
da gama made his country's - and his own - fortune by cornering the market in the 1 5th century's favourite food additive spices.
for centuries, the old spice route ran from the indian ocean over land across the arabian peninsula, into the ottoman empire, and then from venice into europe.
it was entirely dominated by the arabs, the turks and the venetians.
the portuguese had the brilliant idea that if they could find an alternative route, all the way around the coast of africa, round the cape of good hope and into the indian ocean... then this business could be theirs.
it was here in the castle of st george in the hills above lisbon that the newly crowned portuguese king manuel appointed da gama to command a fleet of ships, to make discoveries and go in search of spices.
king manuei's orders to vasco da gama tell us something very important about the overseas spread of western civilization.
as we'ii see, there was more than one killer app, but the one that really started the ball rolling was surely competition - both the main driver of capitalism and of the fragmented european state system.
for europeans, exploration was the iate-15th-century space race.
or rather, spice race.
da gama set sail from this spot on 8th july, 1 497.
when he and his fellow sailors rounded the cape of good hope, the southernmost tip of africa, they weren't wondering, as the chinese had, if they could find some exotic animals to take home to their king.
they were wondering if they could make money there.
ln 1 498, more than 80 years after the chinese explorer zheng he had landed at malindi on the kenyan coast, vasco da gama turned up.
he wasn't here to impress the locals, much less to hunt giraffe.
he immediately saw malindi's potential as a trading post.
by 1 506, the portuguese had a near monopoly on shipping along the east african coast.
this wasn't the only difference between the chinese and the portuguese.
there was also a streak of ruthlessness, of downright nastiness, about these portuguese explorers that zheng he seldom evinced.
the portuguese knew they were eating someone else's lunch along with their spices.
but they were ready to meet any resistance with cannon fire and cutlass.
this is the tomb of vasco da gama here in st jerome's monastery in lisbon.
da gama died in 1524 of a fever, but that didn't mark the end of portuguese ambitions.
expiorers like him pressed on beyond india, as far as china.
the great reversal of fortunes was now unstoppable.
along with portugal, spain had been first off the mark, seizing the initiative in the new world.
the dutch weren't far behind, building up a hugely profitable trading company by following the spice route to indonesia.
they, in turn, were closely followed by the french.
and what of the english, whose territorial ambitions had once extended no further than france and whose one big economic idea had been to sell wool to the italians?
how could they possibly sit on the sidelines with news coming in that their archenemies, the spaniards, were making a killing overseas?
by the 1 7th century, the thames was no longer a provincial backwater.
it was the hub of britain's burgeoning overseas empire.
the docks at deptford were producing ocean-going ships by the dozen.
ln 1 635, the first english merchantman arrived in chinese waters.
once, when zheng he had sailed the high seas,
china had been able to regard distant europeans with indifference, if not contempt.
now trading rivalry had brought the barbarians to china.
and with each new trading post, each new warehouse, each new fort,
western civilization uploaded its unique killer app of commercial competition.
the question is, why did the europeans have that fervour when the chinese didn't?
why was vasco da gama so clearly hungry for money - hungry enough to kill for it?
well, you can find the answer here in the bowels of the british library by looking at wonderful old maps like this one, which is of the city-state of lubeck, dating back to 1530.
it's just one long - very long - celebration of iocal autonomy.
and it was a pattern repeated throughout europe.
in venice, la serenissima, here in frankfurt, on the banks of the river main... and, of course, in london itself.
it wasn't just london pride.
aii the great european cities were proud of their own autonomy.
i can't help feeling the message of these maps is "divide and rule", except that it was by being divided that the europeans ended up ruling the rest of the world.
small was beautiful in the middle ages, because smaiiness meant competition.
competition between states and, within states, between companies.
compare that with china, with its one monolithic empire.
whereas in china power was centralised in the hands of the emperor, in northern europe particularly, there was an astonishing decentralisation.
hundreds of states and city-states competing against each other.
ln england, the most important commercial centre in the country was almost completely autonomous.
the city of london corporation can trace its origins back to the 12th century.
that means that the lord mayor, the sheriffs, the city council, the freemen, the iiverymen and the aldermen are all more than 800 years old, making this the world's oldest autonomous commercial institution.
in many ways, it's the forerunner of today's muitinationai corporations.
in other ways, it's the forerunner of democracy itself.
the city was never in awe of the crown, and the wealthier the city became, the more leverage it had.
loans to the crown became the key to urban autonomy.
and the masters of the medieval universe were the livery companies.
and that's where power used to lie - with the drapers, the goldsmiths, the grocers, the haberdashers, ironmongers, mercers, the saiters, the shearers, the skinners - not forgetting the tailors and the vintners.
dating back to the middle ages, they're a reminder of the amazing power - economic and poiiticai - that used to be wielded by london's craftsmen and merchants.
and craftsmanship brings us back to that great chinese invention the clock.
so this was the cutting edge of timekeeping technology.
yes, totally correct.
no-one else in the world could match the skills or abilities of the english ciockmaker.
there's no better metaphor for the relentless shift of global power than the clock.
the english mechanical clock was not only more accurate than the chinese water clock - it was also designed to be sold widely, rather than monopolised by the emperor's astronomers.
ian:
clocks often were made for a story, and this clock,
nebuchadnezzar is sleeping in the ieft-hand corner of the screen...
niall:
oh, yes.
ian: ...and he's having a dream.
the axeman is chopping the tree of iife down - and the whole world will come to an end, and we'ii all die.
is this the kind of clock that you sent to foreigners to impress them?
that is exactly it.
you're showing off your technology is better than theirs.
the rise of the clock, and later the portable watch, went hand in hand with the rise of europe and the spread of western civilization.
and with every new individual timepiece, a iittie bit more time ran out for the age of oriental predominance.
while europe was a patchwork quilt,
china remained a vast monochrome blanket.
not even the most pretentious european court could match the ming dynasty's authority.
the forbidden city in beijing is just one vast monument to the unity of lmperial power.
just take a walk from the protecting harmony hall to the middle harmony hall, where the emperor had his private quarters, to the hall of supreme harmony, where the dragon throne itself sat.
harmony, harmony, harmony.
it's a kind of codeword for unity, for undivided imperial authority.
this simply had no counterpart among the fractured and competing states and cities of 1 5th-century europe.
ln china, imperial rule was implemented by a confucian bureaucracy, recruited on the basis of perhaps the most terrifying set of exam papers in all history.
this photograph is of the central examination compound in nanjing.
thousands of wannabe mandarins would be locked in these cells, just three-and-a-half feet deep, about the same width, and only five-and-a-half feet high.
during the time an examination lasted, the only movement allowed was the passage of servants, replenishing food and water supplies, or removing human waste.
some candidates went completely insane under the pressure.
no doubt after nine long days shut in a shoebox, it was the most able, and the certainly most indefatigable, candidates who passed the imperial examination.
but this was an exam that rewarded caution, even conformity.
it was competitive, certainly, but not the kind of competition that fosters innovation, much less the appetite for change.
confucius said, among other things, that,
the common man marvels at uncommon things.
the wise man marvels at the commonplace.
but maybe there was just a bit too much that was commonplace about the way that ming china was governed.
and in a world that refused to stand still, that was a recipe for trouble.
big trouble.
great empires are complex things.
for centuries they can bask in a sweet spot of power and prosperity.
but then, often quite suddenly, they can collapse.
let's look again at what happened to lmperial china.
the ming dynasty had been born in 1 368, and as we've seen, for more than a century after that,
ming china was the world's most sophisticated civilization by almost any measure.
but then, in the mid-1 7th century, the wheels came flying off.
political factionalism, fiscal crisis and famine opened the door to rebellion and invasion.
the results were devastating.
conflict and disease reduced the chinese population by as much as 40%.
ln 1 644, the last ming emperor hanged himself out of shame.
this dramatic transition from confucian equipoise to anarchy had taken little more than a decade.
what had gone wrong?
well, the answer is that turning inwards proved fatal for a complex and densely populated society like china's.
the ming system had created a kind of high-equiiibrium trap.
outwardiy it was very impressive, but on the inside it was highly fragile.
the least iittle thing caused the trap to snap shut because there were no external resources to draw on.
and that explains why zheng he, the personification of early chinese expansionism, for so long forgotten, is a hero in today's newly giobaiised china.
ln the words of china's great economic reformer of the 1 980s,
deng xiaoping, "no country that wishes to become developed today
can pursue closed-door policies.
when zheng he sailed the western ocean, our country was open.
after yongle died, the dynasty went into decline
and became backward and mired in darkness and ignorance.
that's a plausible reading of history.
as england's population growth accelerated in the late 1 7th century, trade brought an influx of new nutrients like potatoes and sugar, while colonisation allowed the emigration of surplus people.
over time, the effect was to raise productivity, incomes, nutrition and even height.
ln contrast, by turning away from foreign trade and intensifying rice cultivation, the chinese were stuck with rising population, falling incomes and declining nutrition, height and productivity.
the english got better stimulants, too.
they got the coffee house while the chinese got the opium den.
ln 1 793, the 1 st earl macartney led an expedition to the qianlong emperor, in a vain effort to persuade the chinese to re-open their empire to trade.
macartney brought with him ample tribute the most advanced scientific instruments, including the finest clocks that england could make.
as he later wrote,
the emperor and his minions were unimpressed.
lt was discovered that the taste for science,
if it ever existed, was now completely worn out.
this intricate workmanship was all lost
and thrown away on the ignorant chinese.
unrepentant in his isolation, the emperor addressed a dismissive message to king george lll.
there is nothing we lack.
we have never set much store on strange or ingenious objects.
except maybe those nice english clocksl
i'm standing here in the heart of the forbidden city entirely surrounded by clocks.
it's just that all these clocks were either manufactured by or designed by engiishmen.
nothing could better symboiise the transition of power from east to west.
the chinese had invented the mechanical clock, but now the imperial court was reduced to accepting superior timepieces as gifts from europeans.
and when they broke down, the chinese couidn't even mend them.
the west's ascendancy was perfectly symbolised in june 1 842, when british ships sailed up the yangtze to the grand canal in retaliation for the destruction of opium by a zealous chinese official.
china had to pay an indemnity of 21 million silver dollars, cede the island of hong kong, and open five ports to british trade, including this one.
this is one of the great outposts of british penetration of asia - the shanghai bund.
the old headquarters of the hong kong and shanghai bank used to be described as the most luxurious building between the suez canal and the bering strait.
it was ironic, but perhaps appropriate, that the first "unequal treaty" between britain and china was signed here at the jinghai temple, built by the emperor yongle more than four centuries before, in honour of admiral zheng he,
master and commander of the last lmperial super-ship.
today, they're building ocean-going ships again in china vast ships capable of bringing back the raw materials necessary to feed china's insatiably growing industrial economy.
competition, markets, profits, capitalism - these are things that china once turned its back on.
well, not any more.
i'm standing on a crane in the biggest shipyard in china.
now, if 30 years ago, you'd predicted that china's would be the second largest economy by 201 1 and the largest by 2030,
i think you'd have been dismissed as a fantasist.
but it wouid have seemed equally fantastic in 1 420 to have predicted western ascendancy.
the point is that in the course of the 15th century,
europeans discovered the joys of competition, both economic and poiiticai.
and in a competition for control of the asian spice trade, capitalism was born and, with it, the foundation for a world dominated by western civilization.
the kind of economically driven civilization that today seems to be working rather better in the east.
yet competition was only one of the killer apps of western dominance.
ln the next episode of civilization, l'll ask why it was that the scientific revolution happened only in the west, and failed to take off even in those parts of the eastern world that had once been pioneers of mathematics and astronomy.
why, in short, was there no isaac newton in istanbul?
__file_terminal__
niall ferguson:
ln the 1 9th century, western civilization spread southwards to secure control of a vast and mysterious continent.
this would be the west's biggest challenge africa.
to overcome its inhospitable terrain and climate, its grinding poverty, and in particular, its terrifying repertoire of tropical diseases would require an unprecedented effort.
in this series, i'm identifying the six things,
i'm calling them killer applications, that ensured the west became the world's most powerful civilization.
and i'm asking, if we lose our monopoly over these things, could the rest catch up with the west?
the first three - competition, science and the property-owning democracy - put the west ahead of asia, the muslim world and south america.
in this film, i'm turning to killer app number four, and how it was imposed on africa.
it was here that key breakthroughs were made that helped develop the west's most remarkable and unlikely killer app.
the one that, far from being a killer, had the power to double human life expectancy.
modern medicine.
but there was another, darker side to the life-enhancing powers of medical science.
the pseudo-science of eugenics and racial biology.
this would lead not only to the wholesale slaughter of africans, it would lead ultimately to hitler's gas chambers.
and it would come close to destroying the credibility of western civilization itself.
by the beginning of the 20th century, the conduct of the dominant western powers from asia to africa aroused increasingly bitter opposition from nationalist and socialist critics of imperialism.
asked what he thought of western civilization, the great indian nationalist leader mahatma gandhi replied wittily that he thought it wouid be a very good idea.
it's a negative view shared by many people today.
yet before we rush to condemn the western empires as evil and exploitative, capable of behaviour that was the very opposite of civilized, we need to remember that there was more than a grain of truth in their claim to be on a civilizing mission.
in particular, they had high hopes of what they could achieve here, in what they called the dark continent.
gandhi's verdict that western civilization was a contradiction in terms was a bit hard on the french.
for surely no empire in history has tried harder to make a reality of the phrase "civilizing mission
than the one run from paris.
ln 1 848, a new republican government made a revolutionary decision, one of the most extraordinary in african colonial history.
like all the european empires in africa, the french empire had begun with slavery.
the slave trade which had flourished here on goree had already been abolished, but the distinction between master and slave persisted throughout french africa.
so the first thing the revolutionary government in paris did was to abolish slavery itself.
from now on, everyone in the french empire would be free.
it's not hard to imagine the french slave traders' reaction here in saint-louis, the first capital of french west africa, when the news came through from paris.
but what the french government did next was even more shocking.
from now on, the former slaves would automatically become french citizens.
and that meant that they got the vote, something that was never granted to britain's african subjects.
the result was that in november 1848, 2,000 of france's new african citizens got to elect africa's first muitiraciai assembly.
and this was where it met, in this rather splendid building in saint-louis.
it was a remarkable transformation.
first the end of slavery and then, overnight, democracy.
to the french government, it seemed self-evident that colonial subjects should be transformed into frenchmen with the maximum possible speed.
the revolutionary benefits of liberte, egalite and fraternite were to be extended to everyone, regardless of colour.
in the jargon of the time, the africans were to be "assimilated".
this progressive imperialism was personified by louis faidherbe, who became governor of senegal in 1 852.
faidherbe himself married a 1 5-year-old local girl.
ln 1 857, he set up a senegalese colonial army, les tirailleurs.
at a stroke, faidherbe transformed the status of the african soldier from indentured military iabourer to fully fledged combat effective.
by the 1 860s, former slave markets had become proud outposts of gallic culture.
the erstwhile victims of imperialism had been transformed into citizens with the right to vote and the duty to bear arms.
for one of the beneficiaries, a young senegalese called blaise diagne,
french citizenship opened the door for an extraordinary career.
it was thanks to the french ideal of a "mission civilisatrice", civiiizing mission, that a man like biaise diagne, born in this modest house in goree in 1872, could join the coioniai customs service and rise up through its ranks.
such an ascent would have been a great deal more difficult in british africa.
ln 1 91 4, diagne ended up as the first black african deputy in the french national assembly in paris.
the grandson of a slave had become a lawmaker for france itself.
and yet none of this progress counted for much to ordinary africans if the most basic right of all was missing - the right to live.
the whole french mission civilisatrice was threatened with defeat by one lethal foe.
disease.
specifically, the kind of disease that condemned africans to brief and unproductive lives and made large tracts of sub-saharan africa almost uninhabitable for europeans.
africa was to be the ultimate testing ground for the fourth killer application of western civilization - the power of modern medicine to prolong human life.
there's a great force for good at work in africa today
western aid.
you can argue about the negative effects aid has in propping up corrupt governments and stifling would-be entrepreneurs.
but it's hard to deny that vast sums of money are today being spent to improve the health of africans.
modern medicine made in western laboratories has transformed the lives of all of us, not least those of the people living here in senegal.
since 1960, the mortality rate for under-fives here in senegal has gone down by two-thirds.
average life expectancy at birth has risen has risen from 40 to 55.
aii over the world, the benefits of modern medicine are finding their way siowiy down to the poorest people on the planet.
nothing illustrates the transformational power of western civilization better than a clinic like this, where doctors trained in western medicine confer the ultimate gift, a gift taken for granted by most people in the west.
the gift of a healthy life.
what's not so well-known is that this process of extending life expectancy in africa began during the colonial period.
the great leap forward of western medicine in the 1 9th century was partly a product of the age of empire.
for ruling new lands meant conquering new diseases.
this monument in goree commemorates the 21 doctors and pharmacists who lost their lives in a yellow fever epidemic in 1878.
not for nothing was west africa known as the white man's grave.
the entire coioniai project threatened to be snuffed out at infancy by disease.
take britain.
the six principal british expeditions to west africa between 1 805 and 1 841 suffered an average mortality rate of 50%.
if death rates like these persisted, the colonization of africa by europeans would plainly be unsustainable.
like all good coioniai administrators, the french kept impeccable records, and here in the senegaiese national archives, you can find details of iiteraiiy every outbreak of tropical disease to hit french west africa, from cholera in cote d'ivoire to yellow fever in senegal.
and in fact, this box here contains a comprehensive list of all the victims of the 1878 yellow fever outbreak.
health bills, health commissions, health laws - it was as if the french were obsessed with health.
and why not?
as one british observer put it, the european presence in africa was a question of "mosquito or man".
the future of imperialism itself lay with the microscope.
but the key advances of the late 1 9th century would not be made in the squeaky clean laboratories of western universities and pharmaceutical companies.
it wasn't entirely fanciful to imagine men of science trekking through the jungle.
researchers into tropical diseases established laboratories in the most far-fiung of african colonies.
this one in saint-louis in senegal was set up in 1896.
it's actually the first microbioiogicai laboratory in the whole of africa.
this is where they conducted experiments on animals, injecting trial vaccines.
82 cats had injections of dysentery and 1 1 dogs injections of tetanus.
this really was science on the front line.
other labs worked on cholera, rabies and smallpox.
here was another kind of imperial hero, the bacteriologist, often risking his life to find cures for lethal afflictions.
it was in this tiny laboratory in saint-louis that the first yellow fever vaccine for french west africa was developed.
breakthroughs like that kept europeans, and hence the whole coioniai project, alive.
africa itself had become a laboratory for western medicine.
and the more successful the research, the further the european empires could expand.
colonization in africa was limited at first to coastal settlements.
but with the advent of another western breakthrough, mechanized transport, it could spread inland.
by 1 904, a new federation of french west africa, stretching beyond timbuktu into niger, extended french rule to more than 1 0 million africans.
at root, no doubt about it, empire was about conquest.
the first military use of the french-trained tirailleurs was against the rulers of the senegalese interior.
and french citizenship was certainly not on offer to these new subjects of the african hinterland.
the scramble for africa has become a byword for the ruthless exploitation of an entire continent by rapacious europeans.
but it was also a scramble for scientific knowledge.
with the spread of railways went the spread of western civilization and its killer app, modern medicine.
this was the original medecins sans frontieres
doctors without borders.
it's a point often overlooked by those, like gandhi, who maintained that the european empires had no redeeming feature.
all over the burgeoning french empire, the overthrow of native power structures was followed by an attempt to eradicate native superstitions about health.
now, this is what's meant by traditional healing, because this is actually a senegaiese fertility clinic.
women who are having trouble conceiving come here, get their treatment, and if it's successful, they hammer pesties into the ground - one for the wife and one for the husband - followed by a quick shower.
for centuries, africans have looked to traditional medicine to cure the sick.
ln the village of jajak, that means a witch doctor called han diop.
can she explain what she means by "having devil"?
can you show me some of the medicines that you give your patients?
i'd just like to see them.
merci beaucoup.
tres, tres interessant.
what han uses is a mixture of herbs and a iittie bit of prophecy.
the trouble is, of course, that herbs and prophecy aren't tremendously effective against a whole range of iethai bacteria and viruses, which is one reason that life expectancy in africa is still so low today.
it's also the reason why, in 1897, the french banned witch doctors.
seven years later, they went further, by drawing up plans for the first african national health service.
not only would the french introduce their own system of public health to africa, in february 1905,
governor general roume issued an order creating a free coioniai health service for the africans under his rule.
not everybody likes to admit it, but here, as in many other respects, there were concrete, measurable benefits to european empire.
yet there were limits to what empires would spend on medicine for the natives.
there were few resources to send doctors and vaccines into the isolated villages of inland senegal.
ln the battle against malaria, european residents of african cities got more attention from the colonial health service.
cholera and sleeping sickness, which were bigger killers of africans, had a lower priority.
when plague swept through dakar, the french authorities were ruthless in their response.
the homes of the infected were torched, residents were forcibly removed and quarantined under armed guard.
once, the french had aspired to racial assimilation.
the irony was that medical science now recommended ever-stricter separation.
ln dakar, there were mass protests, riots and the first general strike in senegalese history.
the imperatives of medical science required tough measures to bring the epidemic under control.
and yet the science of the day also provided a spurious rationale for treating africans harshiy.
according to the theory of eugenics,
africans weren't just ignorant of medical science, they were an inferior species.
this was a critical moment in the history of western civilization, as eugenics, the bastard offspring of medical science, came to dominate european thinking about africa and africans.
as a result, the civilizing mission became corrupted, with horrifying consequences.
ln the 1 850s, charles darwin's cousin, an intrepid explorer called francis galton, had travelled through the uncharted lands of the herero and nama in south west africa.
on returning to london,
galton reported to the royal society that he'd seen...
enough of savage races to give me material to think about
all the rest of my life".
indeed, galton's research would inform his later coining of the term
eugenics", the use of selective breeding to improve the human gene pool.
here was the ultimate solution to the problem of public health - a master race of invulnerable superhumans.
the important point to note is that, 100 years ago, work like gaiton's was at the cutting edge of scientific research.
racism wasn't some backward-iooking, reactionary ideology, it was the state of the art, and people then believed in it as readily as people today buy the theory of man-made climate change.
nowhere would the pseudo-science of eugenics have a more pernicious influence than in the lands of the herero and nama, now part of the rapidly growing german empire.
ln 1 900, germany was at the cutting edge of western civilization.
it was german professors who won the lion's share of nobel science prizes.
it was german universities that led the world in chemistry and biochemistry.
yet there was a shadow side to this extraordinary scientific success.
lurking within the real science was a pseudo-science which asserted that man was not a single homogeneous species but was subdivided and ranked, from an aryan master race at the top down to a black race that scarcely qualified as homo sapiens.
and where better to test these theories but in germany's newly acquired african colonies?
each european power evolved its own distinctive species of african colony.
the french, as we've seen, favoured railways and health centres.
the british didn't just dig for gold, they also built mission schools.
the belgians turned the congo into a vast and vile slave state.
the germans were the latecomers to the african party.
where africa was a tropical disease lab for the french, for the germans, it was a testing ground for racial theory.
the german version of the civilizing mission was to have vastly more hideous consequences, but it, too, had its own apparently rigorous scientific rationale.
ln the brightly painted, new german settlements of south west africa,
africans were seen as biologically inferior, an inconvenient obstacle to the development of africa by more advanced white aryans.
ln german towns like this, blacks were forbidden to ride horses, had to salute whites, couldn't walk on the footpaths, couldn't own bicycles or go to libraries.
ln the colony's rudimentary courts of law, the word of one german was worth the word of seven africans.
but the crucial issue was land.
according to the theory of the time, the herero and nama were feckless, improvident nomads.
they had to be displaced by sturdy german farmers.
there was only one small problem for germany's eugenicists - these africans were not the childlike creatures of their racial theory.
after one provocation too many from their overbearing and aggressive settlers, they resolved to resist.
it was the gratuitousiy arrogant behaviour of a young german lieutenant that finally lit the blue touchpaper here in okahandja.
on january 12th 1904, led by samuel maharero, the herero rose up, killing all the abie-bodied german men they could find but pointedly sparing the women and children.
more than 100 german settlers were killed.
ln response, the german government sent this man,
general adrian dietrich lothar von trotha, with instructions to put down the uprising "by fair means or foul".
he chose the foulest at his disposal.
ln a chilling decree addressed to the herero, von trotha spelled out what german theories about race actually meant in practice.
you hereros must now leave this land.
it belongs to the germans.
a herero person in german land shall be killed by the gun.
these are my words to the herero people.
the great general of the mighty german kaiser, trotha.
the battle of hamakari, which took place here, near the waterberg plateau, on november 1 1th 1904, wasn't really a battle at all.
it was more like a massacre.
the herero were gathered here in a iarge, concentrated encampment.
they'd just seen off one german force, so they were expecting peace negotiations.
but instead, von trotha encircied them and rained down a iethai bombardment of mortar shells,
like this one later found on the battiefieid.
then, as the men, women and children tried to flee, they were mown down by maxim guns.
as von trotha told the hapless civilian governor whose authority he'd usurped,
that nation must vanish from the face of the earth.
of course, as von trotha well understood, the survivors now had iittle option but to flee from the water holes on which they depended out into the arid omaheke desert, to "their doom", as he put it.
the herero, in other words, were being deiiberateiy exterminated.
now, we all know that violence is part and parcel of every empire, but this was surely different.
the more i think about this episode, the more i realize it really was the first genocide, long before the word was even invented.
those not shot, hanged or dead of thirst were herded into five concentration camps.
the worst of them was here, on shark island, near luderitz.
the camp was deiiberateiy situated here at the far end of shark island to maximize its exposure to the elements.
denied adequate clothing, shelter and food, the prisoners were expected to work waist-deep in the ice-coid water, and those who faltered in their toll had to fear the sadistic sjambok-wieiding guards.
80% of the prisoners sent to the shark island concentration camp didn't leave here alive.
before the uprising, the herero had numbered 80,000.
afterwards, only 1 5,000 remained.
there had been 20,000 nama.
by 1 91 1, fewer than 1 0,000 were left.
for the germans, annihilating a race was only part of the objective.
the camps would also play a more constructive role.
they would justify the genocide by advancing the cause of a corrupt medical science.
it wasn't just that the herero and nama were interned crueiiy, they were interred crueiiy too - in mass graves like this one that's just been uncovered by the construction of a new railroad from luderitz to aus.
and yet the interesting thing is that not all the remains ended up in places like this.
skuiis and even some pickled heads were sent back to germany to satisfy the insatiable interests of the scientists in racial hygiene.
lncredibly, female prisoners were forced to scrape the skulls clean with glass shards before the specimens were sent off for examination.
ln 1 906, a total of 77 8 autopsies were performed on prisoners for so-called "racial-biological" research.
dr eugen fischer arrived in south west africa just after the death camps opened.
obsessed with the voguish new field of race, he saw the camps as an ideal research opportunity.
for two months, he conducted medical experiments on the mixed-race offspring of african women and european men, which included measuring the heads of both the living and the dead.
in 1913, fischer published his findings.
negro blood, he concluded, was fundamentally inferior to white blood, and any european people that mixed its blood with negro blood condemned itself to mental and cuiturai decline.
well, books like this and mass graves like this one raise a very profoundly disturbing question.
was namibia the seedbed for future, much bigger genocides?
was it, as the novelist joseph conrad suggested, a case of africa turning europeans into savages rather than europeans civiiizing africa?
where was the real heart of darkness?
ln africa?
or in the europeans who treated it as a laboratory for the worst kind of racial pseudo-science?
but what goes around comes around.
racial theory was too virulent an idea to be confined to the colonial periphery.
the fact that there's a first world war memorial in the heart of saint-louis in senegal tells you something important about the war.
it wasn't just a battle between european nation-states, it was a war of world empires, a war within western civilization.
and for the first time, it revealed the possibility that the west might carry the seeds of its own destruction within itself, because more than in any previous war, in this one, the western powers launched their killer applications against one another.
the industrial economy provided the mechanized means of mass murder.
and modern medicine, too, played its part in the bloody business of total war.
by the spring of 1 91 7, the outlook for the allies in the war was bleak.
already by the end of march, 1.3 million frenchmen had been killed, and the government was deeply concerned about the shortage of men.
it's easy to forget that france lost two out of three wars against germany between 1870 and 1940.
in 191 7, it was close to losing the first world war, too.
where could the french turn for help?
well, the answer was to africa.
yet all over french africa, from senegal to the congo,
dahomey and the lvory coast, instead of answering the call of la patrie, africans revolted.
there was only one man who seemed capable of dealing with the crisis
blaise diagne, the first black african to have been elected to the french national assembly.
diagne saw a chance to strike a bargain with the government in paris.
he insisted that any african who came to fight would be given french citizenship.
as an incentive to join up, it proved startlingly successful.
63,000 west africans answered diagne's call, more than twice the number the french had asked for.
demba mboup was among those now eager to fight for france.
l was very happy, because l didn't know what war was really like.
l was going to discover new things and experiences.
l didn't know what would happen to me.
he was to find out soon enough.
his commanding officer was general charles mangin.
ln 1 91 0, as a lieutenant colonel, mangin and a group of scientists had toured west africa with orders to increase recruitment.
what he found there was an almost inexhaustible reservoir of men who seemed to be designed by nature for the battlefield.
charles mangin had also bought into the prevailing pseudo-science of bioiogicai determinism.
having conducted the full range of bogus tests, his survey team concluded that africans, because of their supposedly underdeveioped nervous systems, felt less fear and suffered less pain than their european counterparts.
they could therefore be relied upon to be exceptionally steadfast under fire.
ln 1 91 7, mangin was able to put his theory to the test.
under his leadership, mboup and his fellow tirailleurs were pitted against perhaps the best-trained soldiers the west has ever produced, the fighting machine that was the lmperial german army.
when the senegalese tirailleurs recruited by blaise diagne first arrived in france during the first world war, it seemed to the local population that they were more a circus act than a supply of new manpower for the front line.
but the fun didn't last long.
modern medicine might protect the tirailleurs against disease, but it would be of little use against the machine guns of the german army.
well, this is where demba mboup and his fellow senegaiese soldiers ended up in april 191 7, down below the chemin des dames, the ladies' road, named after two daughters of louis xv.
well, there weren't many ladies up there in 191 7.
there were germans - to be precise, the 7th army under general hans von bohm.
the senegaiese were with charles mangin's 6th army.
and this was supposed to be it - the big push that would break through the german defences and end the war in 48 hours.
altogether, more than a million men with 872 train-loads of artillery shells and 1 7 0 million rounds of rifle ammunition were massed in readiness for the assault.
for days, intensive artillery barrages were supposed to soften up the germans.
at 6am on april 16th, the senegaiese advanced up this hill, which had been turned by rain and sleet into a mudslide.
now, general mangin had put them at the sharp end in the first wave of the attack.
officially, that was because he'd been so impressed by their comrades' performance the previous year at the battle of verdun.
but mangin had an ulterior motive, and that was to spare french lives.
from the german trenches, captain reinhold eichacher watched in horror.
the black senegal negroes, france's cattle for the slaughter.
hundreds of fighting eyes, fixed, threatening, deadly.
and they came, feeling their way like the arms of a horrible cuttlefish.
'close rangel individual firingl take careful aiml'
my orders rang out sharp and clear.
a wall of lead and iron suddenly hurled itself upon the attackers.
the first blacks fell headlong,
turning somersaults like the clowns in a circus.
whole groups melted away.
dismembered bodies, sticky earth,
shattered rocks were mixed in wild disorder.
the senegalese were cannon fodder.
on the first day of the assault, the allied forces suffered 40,000 casualties.
for demba mboup, who was disabled by shrapnel, it was a revelation of the distinctly uncivilized reality of european life and death in time of total war.
as another tirailleur put it, "no rest, always make war,
always kill blacks.
the supreme irony is that the world war provided a new laboratory for the advance of the curative side of western medical science.
the slaughterhouse of the western front was an opportunity for significant advances in surgery, not to mention psychiatry.
the skin graft and antiseptic irrigation of wounds were invented.
the earliest blood transfusions were attempted.
for the first time, all british soldiers were vaccinated against typhoid.
not that these advances helped the tirailleurs much.
if they weren't killed in the trenches, they died in enormous numbers from pneumonia.
why?
according to french experts, they had a racial predisposition to the disease.
the war was also good for proponents of pseudo-science, like dr eugen fischer, the measurer of african skulls.
though he ended up on the losing side, for him, the first world war proved surprisingly fruitful.
as black troops found their way into german prisoner of war camps, they formed another sample of humanity for experiments designed to prove the superiority of the master race.
fischer's the principles of human heredity and race hygiene, published in 1 921, became a standard work within race biology.
hitler read it and even cited it in mein kampf.
one of fischer's students was josef mengele, later responsible for the notorious experiments on prisoners at the auschwitz death camp.
for the many former coioniai soldiers who flocked to join the nazi party and who, incidentally, gave the sa their first brown shirts, it seemed entirely natural that theories first put to the test in the concentration camps of africa should be carried over
to the german colonization of eastern europe, and the murderous racial policies that produced the holocaust, the euthanasia of the mentally ill, and the forced sterilization of so-caiied racial mongreis.
if auschwitz marked the culmination of state violence against racially defined alien populations, then the war against the herero and nama had surely been the first step in its direction.
the world wars were like a terrible nemesis following the hubris of the mission civilisatrice, as the european empires applied against one another those methods which they'd pioneered against africans.
medical science, which had seemed like a universal saviour in the war against disease, ended up being perverted by racial prejudice and the mutant science of eugenics, turning even some doctors into killers.
by 1 945, western civilization did indeed seem like a contradiction in terms, just as gandhi had said.
the puzzle, as we'll see in the next episode of civilization, is that out of this appalling age of destruction, there emerged a new model of civilization centred around consumption.
it was time for the west to lay down its arms and pick up its shopping bags, to take off its uniform and put on its blue jeans.
__file_terminal__
it was here that key breakthroughs were made that helped develop the west's most remarkable and unlikely killer app.
the one that, far from being a killer, had the power to double human life expectancy.
modern medicine.
but there was another, darker side to the life-enhancing powers of medical science.
the pseudo-science of eugenics and racial biology.
this would lead not only to the wholesale slaughter of africans, it would lead ultimately to hitler's gas chambers.
and it would come close to destroying the credibility of western civilization itself.
by the beginning of the 20th century, the conduct of the dominant western powers from asia to africa aroused increasingly bitter opposition from nationalist and socialist critics of imperialism.
asked what he thought of western civilization, the great indian nationalist leader mahatma gandhi replied wittily that he thought it wouid be a very good idea.
it's a negative view shared by many people today.
yet before we rush to condemn the western empires as evil and exploitative, capable of behaviour that was the very opposite of civilized, we need to remember that there was more than a grain of truth in their claim to be on a civilizing mission.
in particular, they had high hopes of what they could achieve here, in what they called the dark continent.
gandhi's verdict that western civilization was a contradiction in terms was a bit hard on the french.
for surely no empire in history has tried harder to make a reality of the phrase "civilizing mission
than the one run from paris.
ln 1 848, a new republican government made a revolutionary decision, one of the most extraordinary in african colonial history.
like all the european empires in africa, the french empire had begun with slavery.
the slave trade which had flourished here on goree had already been abolished, but the distinction between master and slave persisted throughout french africa.
so the first thing the revolutionary government in paris did was to abolish slavery itself.
from now on, everyone in the french empire would be free.
it's not hard to imagine the french slave traders' reaction here in saint-louis, the first capital of french west africa, when the news came through from paris.
but what the french government did next was even more shocking.
from now on, the former slaves would automatically become french citizens.
and that meant that they got the vote, something that was never granted to britain's african subjects.
the result was that in november 1848, 2,000 of france's new african citizens got to elect africa's first muitiraciai assembly.
and this was where it met, in this rather splendid building in saint-louis.
it was a remarkable transformation.
first the end of slavery and then, overnight, democracy.
to the french government, it seemed self-evident that colonial subjects should be transformed into frenchmen with the maximum possible speed.
the revolutionary benefits of liberte, egalite and fraternite were to be extended to everyone, regardless of colour.
in the jargon of the time, the africans were to be "assimilated".
this progressive imperialism was personified by louis faidherbe, who became governor of senegal in 1 852.
faidherbe himself married a 1 5-year-old local girl.
ln 1 857, he set up a senegalese colonial army, les tirailleurs.
at a stroke, faidherbe transformed the status of the african soldier from indentured military iabourer to fully fledged combat effective.
by the 1 860s, former slave markets had become proud outposts of gallic culture.
the erstwhile victims of imperialism had been transformed into citizens with the right to vote and the duty to bear arms.
for one of the beneficiaries, a young senegalese called blaise diagne,
french citizenship opened the door for an extraordinary career.
it was thanks to the french ideal of a "mission civilisatrice", civiiizing mission, that a man like biaise diagne, born in this modest house in goree in 1872, could join the coioniai customs service and rise up through its ranks.
such an ascent would have been a great deal more difficult in british africa.
ln 1 91 4, diagne ended up as the first black african deputy in the french national assembly in paris.
the grandson of a slave had become a lawmaker for france itself.
and yet none of this progress counted for much to ordinary africans if the most basic right of all was missing - the right to live.
the whole french mission civilisatrice was threatened with defeat by one lethal foe.
disease.
specifically, the kind of disease that condemned africans to brief and unproductive lives and made large tracts of sub-saharan africa almost uninhabitable for europeans.
africa was to be the ultimate testing ground for the fourth killer application of western civilization - the power of modern medicine to prolong human life.
there's a great force for good at work in africa today
western aid.
you can argue about the negative effects aid has in propping up corrupt governments and stifling would-be entrepreneurs.
but it's hard to deny that vast sums of money are today being spent to improve the health of africans.
modern medicine made in western laboratories has transformed the lives of all of us, not least those of the people living here in senegal.
since 1960, the mortality rate for under-fives here in senegal has gone down by two-thirds.
average life expectancy at birth has risen has risen from 40 to 55.
aii over the world, the benefits of modern medicine are finding their way siowiy down to the poorest people on the planet.
nothing illustrates the transformational power of western civilization better than a clinic like this, where doctors trained in western medicine confer the ultimate gift, a gift taken for granted by most people in the west.
the gift of a healthy life.
what's not so well-known is that this process of extending life expectancy in africa began during the colonial period.
the great leap forward of western medicine in the 1 9th century was partly a product of the age of empire.
for ruling new lands meant conquering new diseases.
this monument in goree commemorates the 21 doctors and pharmacists who lost their lives in a yellow fever epidemic in 1878.
not for nothing was west africa known as the white man's grave.
the entire coioniai project threatened to be snuffed out at infancy by disease.
take britain.
the six principal british expeditions to west africa between 1 805 and 1 841 suffered an average mortality rate of 50%.
if death rates like these persisted, the colonization of africa by europeans would plainly be unsustainable.
like all good coioniai administrators, the french kept impeccable records, and here in the senegaiese national archives, you can find details of iiteraiiy every outbreak of tropical disease to hit french west africa, from cholera in cote d'ivoire to yellow fever in senegal.
and in fact, this box here contains a comprehensive list of all the victims of the 1878 yellow fever outbreak.
health bills, health commissions, health laws - it was as if the french were obsessed with health.
and why not?
as one british observer put it, the european presence in africa was a question of "mosquito or man".
the future of imperialism itself lay with the microscope.
but the key advances of the late 1 9th century would not be made in the squeaky clean laboratories of western universities and pharmaceutical companies.
it wasn't entirely fanciful to imagine men of science trekking through the jungle.
researchers into tropical diseases established laboratories in the most far-fiung of african colonies.
this one in saint-louis in senegal was set up in 1896.
it's actually the first microbioiogicai laboratory in the whole of africa.
this is where they conducted experiments on animals, injecting trial vaccines.
82 cats had injections of dysentery and 1 1 dogs injections of tetanus.
this really was science on the front line.
other labs worked on cholera, rabies and smallpox.
here was another kind of imperial hero, the bacteriologist, often risking his life to find cures for lethal afflictions.
it was in this tiny laboratory in saint-louis that the first yellow fever vaccine for french west africa was developed.
breakthroughs like that kept europeans, and hence the whole coioniai project, alive.
africa itself had become a laboratory for western medicine.
and the more successful the research, the further the european empires could expand.
colonization in africa was limited at first to coastal settlements.
but with the advent of another western breakthrough, mechanized transport, it could spread inland.
by 1 904, a new federation of french west africa, stretching beyond timbuktu into niger, extended french rule to more than 1 0 million africans.
at root, no doubt about it, empire was about conquest.
the first military use of the french-trained tirailleurs was against the rulers of the senegalese interior.
and french citizenship was certainly not on offer to these new subjects of the african hinterland.
the scramble for africa has become a byword for the ruthless exploitation of an entire continent by rapacious europeans.
but it was also a scramble for scientific knowledge.
with the spread of railways went the spread of western civilization and its killer app, modern medicine.
this was the original medecins sans frontieres
doctors without borders.
it's a point often overlooked by those, like gandhi, who maintained that the european empires had no redeeming feature.
all over the burgeoning french empire, the overthrow of native power structures was followed by an attempt to eradicate native superstitions about health.
now, this is what's meant by traditional healing, because this is actually a senegaiese fertility clinic.
women who are having trouble conceiving come here, get their treatment, and if it's successful, they hammer pesties into the ground - one for the wife and one for the husband - followed by a quick shower.
for centuries, africans have looked to traditional medicine to cure the sick.
ln the village of jajak, that means a witch doctor called han diop.
can she explain what she means by "having devil"?
can you show me some of the medicines that you give your patients?
i'd just like to see them.
merci beaucoup.
tres, tres interessant.
what han uses is a mixture of herbs and a iittie bit of prophecy.
the trouble is, of course, that herbs and prophecy aren't tremendously effective against a whole range of iethai bacteria and viruses, which is one reason that life expectancy in africa is still so low today.
it's also the reason why, in 1897, the french banned witch doctors.
seven years later, they went further, by drawing up plans for the first african national health service.
not only would the french introduce their own system of public health to africa, in february 1905,
governor general roume issued an order creating a free coioniai health service for the africans under his rule.
not everybody likes to admit it, but here, as in many other respects, there were concrete, measurable benefits to european empire.
yet there were limits to what empires would spend on medicine for the natives.
there were few resources to send doctors and vaccines into the isolated villages of inland senegal.
ln the battle against malaria, european residents of african cities got more attention from the colonial health service.
cholera and sleeping sickness, which were bigger killers of africans, had a lower priority.
when plague swept through dakar, the french authorities were ruthless in their response.
the homes of the infected were torched, residents were forcibly removed and quarantined under armed guard.
once, the french had aspired to racial assimilation.
the irony was that medical science now recommended ever-stricter separation.
ln dakar, there were mass protests, riots and the first general strike in senegalese history.
the imperatives of medical science required tough measures to bring the epidemic under control.
and yet the science of the day also provided a spurious rationale for treating africans harshiy.
according to the theory of eugenics,
africans weren't just ignorant of medical science, they were an inferior species.
this was a critical moment in the history of western civilization, as eugenics, the bastard offspring of medical science, came to dominate european thinking about africa and africans.
as a result, the civilizing mission became corrupted, with horrifying consequences.
ln the 1 850s, charles darwin's cousin, an intrepid explorer called francis galton, had travelled through the uncharted lands of the herero and nama in south west africa.
on returning to london,
galton reported to the royal society that he'd seen...
enough of savage races to give me material to think about
all the rest of my life".
indeed, galton's research would inform his later coining of the term
eugenics", the use of selective breeding to improve the human gene pool.
here was the ultimate solution to the problem of public health - a master race of invulnerable superhumans.
the important point to note is that, 100 years ago, work like gaiton's was at the cutting edge of scientific research.
racism wasn't some backward-iooking, reactionary ideology, it was the state of the art, and people then believed in it as readily as people today buy the theory of man-made climate change.
nowhere would the pseudo-science of eugenics have a more pernicious influence than in the lands of the herero and nama, now part of the rapidly growing german empire.
ln 1 900, germany was at the cutting edge of western civilization.
it was german professors who won the lion's share of nobel science prizes.
it was german universities that led the world in chemistry and biochemistry.
yet there was a shadow side to this extraordinary scientific success.
lurking within the real science was a pseudo-science which asserted that man was not a single homogeneous species but was subdivided and ranked, from an aryan master race at the top down to a black race that scarcely qualified as homo sapiens.
and where better to test these theories but in germany's newly acquired african colonies?
each european power evolved its own distinctive species of african colony.
the french, as we've seen, favoured railways and health centres.
the british didn't just dig for gold, they also built mission schools.
the belgians turned the congo into a vast and vile slave state.
the germans were the latecomers to the african party.
where africa was a tropical disease lab for the french, for the germans, it was a testing ground for racial theory.
the german version of the civilizing mission was to have vastly more hideous consequences, but it, too, had its own apparently rigorous scientific rationale.
ln the brightly painted, new german settlements of south west africa,
africans were seen as biologically inferior, an inconvenient obstacle to the development of africa by more advanced white aryans.
ln german towns like this, blacks were forbidden to ride horses, had to salute whites, couldn't walk on the footpaths, couldn't own bicycles or go to libraries.
ln the colony's rudimentary courts of law, the word of one german was worth the word of seven africans.
but the crucial issue was land.
according to the theory of the time, the herero and nama were feckless, improvident nomads.
they had to be displaced by sturdy german farmers.
there was only one small problem for germany's eugenicists - these africans were not the childlike creatures of their racial theory.
after one provocation too many from their overbearing and aggressive settlers, they resolved to resist.
it was the gratuitousiy arrogant behaviour of a young german lieutenant that finally lit the blue touchpaper here in okahandja.
on january 12th 1904, led by samuel maharero, the herero rose up, killing all the abie-bodied german men they could find but pointedly sparing the women and children.
more than 100 german settlers were killed.
ln response, the german government sent this man,
general adrian dietrich lothar von trotha, with instructions to put down the uprising "by fair means or foul".
he chose the foulest at his disposal.
ln a chilling decree addressed to the herero, von trotha spelled out what german theories about race actually meant in practice.
you hereros must now leave this land.
it belongs to the germans.
a herero person in german land shall be killed by the gun.
these are my words to the herero people.
the great general of the mighty german kaiser, trotha.
the battle of hamakari, which took place here, near the waterberg plateau, on november 1 1th 1904, wasn't really a battle at all.
it was more like a massacre.
the herero were gathered here in a iarge, concentrated encampment.
they'd just seen off one german force, so they were expecting peace negotiations.
but instead, von trotha encircied them and rained down a iethai bombardment of mortar shells,
like this one later found on the battiefieid.
then, as the men, women and children tried to flee, they were mown down by maxim guns.
as von trotha told the hapless civilian governor whose authority he'd usurped,
that nation must vanish from the face of the earth.
of course, as von trotha well understood, the survivors now had iittle option but to flee from the water holes on which they depended out into the arid omaheke desert, to "their doom", as he put it.
the herero, in other words, were being deiiberateiy exterminated.
now, we all know that violence is part and parcel of every empire, but this was surely different.
the more i think about this episode, the more i realize it really was the first genocide, long before the word was even invented.
those not shot, hanged or dead of thirst were herded into five concentration camps.
the worst of them was here, on shark island, near luderitz.
the camp was deiiberateiy situated here at the far end of shark island to maximize its exposure to the elements.
denied adequate clothing, shelter and food, the prisoners were expected to work waist-deep in the ice-coid water, and those who faltered in their toll had to fear the sadistic sjambok-wieiding guards.
80% of the prisoners sent to the shark island concentration camp didn't leave here alive.
before the uprising, the herero had numbered 80,000.
afterwards, only 1 5,000 remained.
there had been 20,000 nama.
by 1 91 1, fewer than 1 0,000 were left.
for the germans, annihilating a race was only part of the objective.
the camps would also play a more constructive role.
they would justify the genocide by advancing the cause of a corrupt medical science.
it wasn't just that the herero and nama were interned crueiiy, they were interred crueiiy too - in mass graves like this one that's just been uncovered by the construction of a new railroad from luderitz to aus.
and yet the interesting thing is that not all the remains ended up in places like this.
skuiis and even some pickled heads were sent back to germany to satisfy the insatiable interests of the scientists in racial hygiene.
lncredibly, female prisoners were forced to scrape the skulls clean with glass shards before the specimens were sent off for examination.
ln 1 906, a total of 77 8 autopsies were performed on prisoners for so-called "racial-biological" research.
dr eugen fischer arrived in south west africa just after the death camps opened.
obsessed with the voguish new field of race, he saw the camps as an ideal research opportunity.
for two months, he conducted medical experiments on the mixed-race offspring of african women and european men, which included measuring the heads of both the living and the dead.
in 1913, fischer published his findings.
negro blood, he concluded, was fundamentally inferior to white blood, and any european people that mixed its blood with negro blood condemned itself to mental and cuiturai decline.
well, books like this and mass graves like this one raise a very profoundly disturbing question.
was namibia the seedbed for future, much bigger genocides?
was it, as the novelist joseph conrad suggested, a case of africa turning europeans into savages rather than europeans civiiizing africa?
where was the real heart of darkness?
ln africa?
or in the europeans who treated it as a laboratory for the worst kind of racial pseudo-science?
but what goes around comes around.
racial theory was too virulent an idea to be confined to the colonial periphery.
the fact that there's a first world war memorial in the heart of saint-louis in senegal tells you something important about the war.
it wasn't just a battle between european nation-states, it was a war of world empires, a war within western civilization.
and for the first time, it revealed the possibility that the west might carry the seeds of its own destruction within itself, because more than in any previous war, in this one, the western powers launched their killer applications against one another.
the industrial economy provided the mechanized means of mass murder.
and modern medicine, too, played its part in the bloody business of total war.
by the spring of 1 91 7, the outlook for the allies in the war was bleak.
already by the end of march, 1.3 million frenchmen had been killed, and the government was deeply concerned about the shortage of men.
it's easy to forget that france lost two out of three wars against germany between 1870 and 1940.
in 191 7, it was close to losing the first world war, too.
where could the french turn for help?
well, the answer was to africa.
yet all over french africa, from senegal to the congo,
dahomey and the lvory coast, instead of answering the call of la patrie, africans revolted.
there was only one man who seemed capable of dealing with the crisis
blaise diagne, the first black african to have been elected to the french national assembly.
diagne saw a chance to strike a bargain with the government in paris.
he insisted that any african who came to fight would be given french citizenship.
as an incentive to join up, it proved startlingly successful.
63,000 west africans answered diagne's call, more than twice the number the french had asked for.
demba mboup was among those now eager to fight for france.
l was very happy, because l didn't know what war was really like.
l was going to discover new things and experiences.
l didn't know what would happen to me.
he was to find out soon enough.
his commanding officer was general charles mangin.
ln 1 91 0, as a lieutenant colonel, mangin and a group of scientists had toured west africa with orders to increase recruitment.
what he found there was an almost inexhaustible reservoir of men who seemed to be designed by nature for the battlefield.
charles mangin had also bought into the prevailing pseudo-science of bioiogicai determinism.
having conducted the full range of bogus tests, his survey team concluded that africans, because of their supposedly underdeveioped nervous systems, felt less fear and suffered less pain than their european counterparts.
they could therefore be relied upon to be exceptionally steadfast under fire.
ln 1 91 7, mangin was able to put his theory to the test.
under his leadership, mboup and his fellow tirailleurs were pitted against perhaps the best-trained soldiers the west has ever produced, the fighting machine that was the lmperial german army.
when the senegalese tirailleurs recruited by blaise diagne first arrived in france during the first world war, it seemed to the local population that they were more a circus act than a supply of new manpower for the front line.
but the fun didn't last long.
modern medicine might protect the tirailleurs against disease, but it would be of little use against the machine guns of the german army.
well, this is where demba mboup and his fellow senegaiese soldiers ended up in april 191 7, down below the chemin des dames, the ladies' road, named after two daughters of louis xv.
well, there weren't many ladies up there in 191 7.
there were germans - to be precise, the 7th army under general hans von bohm.
the senegaiese were with charles mangin's 6th army.
and this was supposed to be it - the big push that would break through the german defences and end the war in 48 hours.
altogether, more than a million men with 872 train-loads of artillery shells and 1 7 0 million rounds of rifle ammunition were massed in readiness for the assault.
for days, intensive artillery barrages were supposed to soften up the germans.
at 6am on april 16th, the senegaiese advanced up this hill, which had been turned by rain and sleet into a mudslide.
now, general mangin had put them at the sharp end in the first wave of the attack.
officially, that was because he'd been so impressed by their comrades' performance the previous year at the battle of verdun.
but mangin had an ulterior motive, and that was to spare french lives.
from the german trenches, captain reinhold eichacher watched in horror.
the black senegal negroes, france's cattle for the slaughter.
hundreds of fighting eyes, fixed, threatening, deadly.
and they came, feeling their way like the arms of a horrible cuttlefish.
'close rangel individual firingl take careful aiml'
my orders rang out sharp and clear.
a wall of lead and iron suddenly hurled itself upon the attackers.
the first blacks fell headlong,
turning somersaults like the clowns in a circus.
whole groups melted away.
dismembered bodies, sticky earth,
shattered rocks were mixed in wild disorder.
the senegalese were cannon fodder.
on the first day of the assault, the allied forces suffered 40,000 casualties.
for demba mboup, who was disabled by shrapnel, it was a revelation of the distinctly uncivilized reality of european life and death in time of total war.
as another tirailleur put it, "no rest, always make war,
always kill blacks.
the supreme irony is that the world war provided a new laboratory for the advance of the curative side of western medical science.
the slaughterhouse of the western front was an opportunity for significant advances in surgery, not to mention psychiatry.
the skin graft and antiseptic irrigation of wounds were invented.
the earliest blood transfusions were attempted.
for the first time, all british soldiers were vaccinated against typhoid.
not that these advances helped the tirailleurs much.
if they weren't killed in the trenches, they died in enormous numbers from pneumonia.
why?
according to french experts, they had a racial predisposition to the disease.
the war was also good for proponents of pseudo-science, like dr eugen fischer, the measurer of african skulls.
though he ended up on the losing side, for him, the first world war proved surprisingly fruitful.
as black troops found their way into german prisoner of war camps, they formed another sample of humanity for experiments designed to prove the superiority of the master race.
fischer's the principles of human heredity and race hygiene, published in 1 921, became a standard work within race biology.
hitler read it and even cited it in mein kampf.
one of fischer's students was josef mengele, later responsible for the notorious experiments on prisoners at the auschwitz death camp.
for the many former coioniai soldiers who flocked to join the nazi party and who, incidentally, gave the sa their first brown shirts, it seemed entirely natural that theories first put to the test in the concentration camps of africa should be carried over
to the german colonization of eastern europe, and the murderous racial policies that produced the holocaust, the euthanasia of the mentally ill, and the forced sterilization of so-caiied racial mongreis.
if auschwitz marked the culmination of state violence against racially defined alien populations, then the war against the herero and nama had surely been the first step in its direction.
the world wars were like a terrible nemesis following the hubris of the mission civilisatrice, as the european empires applied against one another those methods which they'd pioneered against africans.
medical science, which had seemed like a universal saviour in the war against disease, ended up being perverted by racial prejudice and the mutant science of eugenics, turning even some doctors into killers.
by 1 945, western civilization did indeed seem like a contradiction in terms, just as gandhi had said.
the puzzle, as we'll see in the next episode of civilization, is that out of this appalling age of destruction, there emerged a new model of civilization centred around consumption.
it was time for the west to lay down its arms and pick up its shopping bags, to take off its uniform and put on its blue jeans.
__file_terminal__
now on top gear...
it's all about america's strongest vehicles...
tanner takes a new off road and deep into the swamp to race an *.
races around our track.
and we find over which is the toughest heavy duty truck in america.
trucks.
they make up more than half the vehicle sales for the u.s., but which one is king?
we each chose what we thought was the biggest, baddest truck in the country and took them into the desert for a showdown.
adam chose the ram 3500.
tanner chose the ford f-450.
and i brought the chevy hd3500.
you know what vehicle the secret service chose to underpin the new presidential limo, nicknamed "the beast"?
oh, it may look like a cadillac on the outside, but underneath, it's all chevy truck, as if you needed any more convincing that this is the best heavy-duty truck.
oh, gentlemen, you've finally been outgunned.
for once, i landed the king of the hill in one of these challenges.
please.
that?
yeah.
how do you figure?
you know that this is the truck that, first of all, outsells both of these almost two to one.
justin bieber can pack a full house at a concert.
that doesn't mean i'm going.
okay, that's right.
you're right.
it's all really about the numbers-- 24,400 pounds.
when are you gonna need to tow 24,000
i tow my trailer.
when do you tow anything?
two race cars in a big-ass trailer.
you don't tow that!
you fly.
you get in the car, you drive, and you fly home.
there's somebody towing that, and i had to get the truck.
what can the dodge do?
it's not even a dodge anymore.
it's a ram.
you mean dodge was so embarrassed by it, they were like, "we can't even put our own name on it"?
dodge was embarrassed by a tough truck?
no.
this truck was so tough, it was asked to leave.
they told this truck,
excuse me-- you're frightening minivans.
all the caravans are crying.
you're gonna have to go.
guys, you clearly didn't notice that i brought the chevy hd.
i mean, that's the coolest one.
you think?
it's like an escalade in there.
do you have air-conditioned seats?
yes.
you know why?
'cause you have ass sweat.
i'm hardworking.
i'm out there getting it done.
i might need air-conditioned seats.
[ laughs ] what are you getting done?
the chevy hd, out there getting it done.
[ laughs ]
like 800 foot-pounds of torque.
anybody got anything over that?
i've got 765.
hmm.
but i'm telling you, that sucker's fast.
the ford is quick.
even with a trailer, it pulls like a freight train.
how fast is it?
it's quick.
i think we should find out which truck is the quickest.
really?
you thinking what i'm thinking?
drag race?
three wide.
it is on.
let's go.
it is on.
foust:
my ford had 400 horsepower.
rutledge's chevy had 397, so we were pretty evenly matched.
adam
not so much.
okay, i have six cylinders.
i'm gonna lose.
i know i'm gonna lose.
the only question is by how much.
the key to any good drag race is the launch.
i'm gonna start in second gear with a little bit of a burnout.
just gonna see how that goes.
okay, gentlemen, you ready?
tallyho.
ready.
okay.
and we'll do it in 3... 2... 1...
go.
not the best start.
come on, baby.
go, go, go, go, go, go!
oh, yes!
no!
come on!
shift, shift, shift!
oh, my god.
40, 50.
shift!
come on.
800 foot-pounds of torque.
rocket ship!
60, 65.
shift!
oh, it's so close!
come on, chevy!
shift!
thank you.
oh, so soon?
75, 80.
i'm nosing it!
noooooooo!
i beat the ford!
yeah!
that's like a rock, baby!
foust:
i'm thinking the burnout was a bad idea on my part because you beat me by like 4 inches.
are you
i had you at least a car length.
it was probably less than
hey, adam, you're back.
how you doing?
adam, did you go when tanner counted?
all right, all right.
tanner, it doesn't matter whether you win by an inch or you win by a mile.
those are nascar words, aren't they?
no.
it was vin diesel in the first "fast and the furious.
ruedge can keep his chevy.
for me, it's all about the ford.
okay.
i have had five super-duty trucks.
i've had f-350s.
i've had the earlier version, two of the f-450s, and now i have a super-duty 350 with this motor.
and i think the ford super-duty can do just about everything well, and i think it's the best workhorse money can buy.
thank you.
no!
you got to be kidding me!
by an inch or a mile.
and where were you?
i was making sure you guys were keeping it fair.
i have six cylinders.
you guys should have beat me by a lot more than that.
you kidding me?
but it was like 3 inches.
it's a long, sad story.
you still lost.
the point is, we went like 80 miles an hour.
that's like a horsepower test.
that's not even a torque test.
trucks are, like, about torque.
well, you have more horsepower than me, so either way
either way, you lost the test.
no, it's heavy.
it's 8,000-pound truck.
it's way heavier than mine.
that's why.
that's why i won.
yeah.
so, what are you trying to say?
i'm just saying that with trucks, it's about torque, and for torque, it's the twisting power.
it's like smoking tires, burnout, pulling trailers.
so, what you're saying in a roundabout way is you would like a burnout test?
i think a burnout competition.
really?
because it's about torque.
you want to run double 11s?
double 11s with the duallys.
longest one wins?
yes.
your honor.
i'm up?
you're up.
all right.
this is gonna be a big fail.
wood:
to find out which of our trucks could apply the most power to the ground, we conducted a very scientific test.
you guys ready?
ferrara:
you ready?
light 'em up!
left foot on the brake, and i'm just gonna mash the accelerator.
[ engine revs ]
what?
doesn't look good.
what?
hold on one second!
i got to get it squared up!
what is he saying?
i don't know.
where's he going?
i don't know.
that didn't work, so plan "b.
i find it hard to believe a truck with 760 foot-pounds of torque cannot spin the tires.
i thought he would at least break them loose.
your truck will break them loose, right?
yeah.
what is he
he's backing up.
the shame.
he's gonna do this
oh, that's funny.
you're killing me!
oh!
[ laughs ]
whoo!
can you see them?
that was depressing.
look at that!
yeah!
must be 30 feet!
look at them.
they're great.
[ laughing ] they're great.
those are-- that's not your
adam, do you think you could do a burnout with your diesel truck?
watch and learn.
are you gonna stand here while he does this?
no.
hell, no.
seen this before.
ferrara:
okay.
i got to be honest with you.
i don't think this thing will break them loose.
i'm gonna try.
he's got, what, 8 pounds of torque?
hit it!
do your worst, buddy.
i'm sorry in advance.
oh!
he
[ laughs ]
okay, now your truck sucks.
i'll be honest with you.
that's a lot better than i thought.
look at that.
it goes two lines.
it goes all the way to the second line.
i mean, my marks are so dark, it's hard to tell.
whatever.
easy to get them confused.
18, 19, still going.
ferrara:
look at that.
24.
i don't know what that means in distance, though.
24 little tanner feet?
24 big, giant...
[ laughs ]
i'm gonna go do a burnout.
ferrara:
coming up, it's tanner's turn to see if he has the toughest truck.
america!
wood:
we were in the midst of our america's toughest truck challenge.
i nosed out tanner to win the drag race.
then, to find out which one of our trucks had the most torque, we conducted a very scientific longest-burnout test.
wood:
what do you think?
here's the problem
it's him, you know, so he can do this kind of stuff.
so, it's really not fair.
traction control off.
a/c off.
you guys good?
i think you've got no chance.
i think he's got you beat.
well, i think i did mine forward.
i think that should count for something.
[ speaks indistinctly ]
what's he doing now?
oh.
okay.
yeah.
now you're just showing off.
now you're just showing off!
america!
not funny!
i get it.
we get it, okay?
i get it.
you win.
oh, you're awesome.
come on.
really?
[ coughs ]
[ laughing ]
still going.
i'm gonna go get some coffee, okay?
i'll be back in a little bit!
[ cheers and applause ]
that didn't feel just a little bit over-the-top?
nope.
i didn't do that to you when i beat you in the drag race.
you just said that to point out you beat me in the drag race, didn't you?
i did.
yeah.
okay.
well, i think we can all agree that the f-450 is the best dually on the planet, yes?
[ cheers and applause ]
but if you think that was tough, take a look at this.
this is the rally fighter from a company called local motors.
now, this is an actual production car, one of 30 made.
i got a chance to drive the prototype.
they claim it can handle anything, so i took it to the most hostile environment on the planet.
foust:
to find the largest swamp in the u.s., you have to head deep into the damp, dark heart of southern louisiana.
there lies the at chafalaya swamp, 600,000 acres of slow-moving water and lush vegetation.
these low-lying wetlands are in constant evolution and are home to hundreds of species, including thousands of alligators, numerous poisonous snakes, several billion mosquitoes, and...
a few crazy locals.
so, i had the location.
now i needed something to race the rally fighter against.
it's a bit of a weird place, the swamp.
it's not a place you'd normally drive.
but there is one local motor that's perfect for the swamp.
[ engine revs ]
an airboat.
an airboat is a simple machine, not much more than a tin tray with an engine and propeller bolted on it.
in engineering terms, it's about as complicated as a sledgehammer, but it's incredibly effective at getting through unpassable areas.
this is not your normal airboat.
look at it.
this is the godzilla of airboats.
this thing has won airboat competitions.
that's right.
there are airboat competitions.
it's got a v-8 that's supercharged with 800 horsepower.
it's unbelievable.
there's one thing that everybody knows in the swamp.
airboats are difficult to drive.
so, to handle a beast like this, we needed the most skilled driver, which is this guy.
stan floyd owns and runs american airboats and has been building and designing them for 50 years.
but that's not all.
he's texan and a vietnam vet and possibly the best airboat driver on the planet.
basically, if you're into airboats, then stan is your god.
stan may be the man when it comes to airboats, but he's gonna have his hands full racing this.
[ engine revs ]
you've got to be kidding me!
i'm loving it!
this is the rally fighter.
it's not a dune buggy or a trophy truck.
it's an off-road beast that can handle any kind of terrain.
but, amazingly, you can also drive it to work.
if you want a vehicle you can legally drive on the road and then literally drive across the border and enter into the baja 1000, you probably need one of these.
the craziest part about this thing is that local motors didn't even design it.
it was designed on the internet.
yep, you heard me-- the internet.
they held an open competition on the web, and an online vote decided the winner.
so, what does all this social networking and auto tweeting get you?
for 60 grand, what you get is a corvette engine but miata door handles.
you get a ford truck rear end but honda civic taillights.
you get a chevrolet transmission but an f-150 steering wheel.
it all sounds like a recipe for disaster, but then you drive it.
oh, we want some speed now.
come on, baby!
the 430-horsepower engine has enough torque to start a sandstorm.
my god!
this is street-legal?
the suspension has enough travel to collect frequent-flyer points... 18 inches in the front, and a staggering 20 inches in the rear.
this is coming off dry.
this...
is ridiculous.
pure ridiculousness.
it might be ridiculous, but it works.
somehow, all those random parts and designs have come together to make a formidable machine.
i was really starting to like the rally fighter.
and i thought it was time to introduce it to the swamp.
oh, no!
i'm getting absolutely soaked!
[ engine revs ]
[ thud ]
oh, god!
that was a tree.
[ engine stops ]
uh-oh.
killed it.
[ engine sputters ]
uh, let's bring the mechanic out.
man:
copy.
stand by.
it was about to re-fire.
it's just you can hear rattling, and i shut it off.
let's fire it up.
let's give it a try.
you sure?
absolutely.
is it already done done?
we can do no harm.
come on.
let it rip.
really?
come on.
do it.
yeah.
[ engine sputters ]
ooh, it is a funny
come on.
still, let's try it.
no, that finished it.
that was it?
you do it.
[ laughs ]
i don't want to kill it.
all right.
pushing the button.
[ ignition clicking ]
i believe she's a dead player.
i'm out of here.
new shoes.
i had killed the rally fighter, but, luckily, i had a backup, so the race against the airboat was still on.
the race would be 6 miles long and the route completely unpredictable.
i'd be on a mixture of rough trails, gravel levee roads, and farm tracts.
and the airboat would travel along the shoreline to begin before heading deep into the swamp to the finish.
i was expecting the start line to be near the water, but stan had other ideas.
so, stan, you're actually gonna drive down the street with that?
yeah.
have you ever had this on pavement before?
yeah, at the armadillo nationals in houston.
it's called the armadillo nationals?
armadillo nationals.
after i passed and it blew the christmas tree down, the track officials were very upset with me.
are you allowed back there?
probably not.
all right.
let's do this.
all right.
you're not gonna mind an old texan kicking yours, right?
[ engine turns over ]
i was worried about the backwash from the props.
i should have worried more about stan's math.
5...4.3... 2...1...
go!
turned out stan couldn't count, and he also was completely insane.
his crazy levee stunt had given him a huge lead.
oh, my god.
what kind of route is this?
stan hit the open water and opened up the big v-8-- 80 miles an hour in just 400 feet.
go, go, go, go, go!
little bit of a jump.
18 inches from stan's head, the prop was traveling at the speed of sound, creating 150-mile-an-hour backwash.
it is so bumpy.
i think i can get him on the levee now.
he is so far ahead of me at this point.
while i crashed around on the banks,
stan was gliding serenely across the glassy water.
he was destroying me.
i finally made it to the levee road-- 6 feet of dirt, a 50-foot drop on each side, but it was all i needed to get on the gas.
so, now we're laying down some speed.
80, 90.
100 miles an hour on a levee.
i've done a few smarter things in my life, i think.
i just can't let a guy with a hawaiian shirt beat me.
that's really what it comes down to.
stan had navigated away from the shore and was now halfway to the finish line.
and the gators were ducking.
the airboat god of thunder was approaching.
but the murky waters concealed rotting cypress stumps.
stan had to slow or risk an impact and flip the boat.
an airboat has no brakes and no reverse.
driving one takes real commitment.
three miles in, and i'd finally hit the end of the levee road.
up ahead lay 2 miles of farmland and horse trails.
where am i going?
holy crap.
stan had also steered away from the swamp, over the levee, and into the bayou.
is it worth 60 grand?
i don't know.
certainly won't have any worries about making it to work.
big bump.
there he is!
holy [bleep]
oh, my gosh.
stan's little shortcut had given him the lead.
with just 2 miles to go,
i had no choice but to go all-out.
[ suspension thumps ]
oh!
[bleep]
this thing is tough as nails.
oh, big corner.
i can't think of another production vehicle that could take the hit that i just did.
and it's fine.
this truck is a tank, or car
whatever it is.
stan was now back in the swamp, picking up speed, while i had a farm between me and the levee.
it was too close to call.
finally, i hit the levee again.
it was a straight run from here to the finish one mile away.
the question was, where was stan?
oh, no!
there he is!
oh, my god.
that hurt.
that hurt a lot.
go!
this is it right here!
stan had edged ahead of me with just 500 yards to go.
it was now or never.
i had to floor it, or jimmy buffett in the flying hairdryer would be drinking the victory beer.
come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on!
whoa!
yes!
he almost just flipped it!
oh, my gosh!
coming up, we continue our toughest-truck challenge.
he's gonna electrocute all of us.
our america's strongest truck challenge started off great with me winning in the drag race.
thank you.
and then tanner won the burnout challenge.
ferrara:
yeah.
and raceboy was really starting to get annoying, so we decided to teach him a lesson in the next challenge.
ferrara:
each of us had picked what we thought was the toughest truck.
i, of course, chose the ram,
tanner, the ford, and rutledge, the chevy.
and we were having a competition to prove who had the best.
tanner and rutledge each had one victory.
yeah!
that's like a rock, baby!
so we drove high into the hills for our third test.
wood:
this is it.
this is it?
yeah.
look at this.
this is the perfect thing to test a truck's off-road prowess.
this is a runaway-truck ramp used to stop 80,000-pound-plus trucks coming down this huge hill.
yeah, this is like rock quicksand.
this stops 80,000-pound trucks.
right.
the problem with the plan
and i respect your-- you know, wanting to try to actually make it up this in the chevy
you've got independent front suspension, which, awesome on the road.
fantastic.
yeah, great.
terrible for off-roading.
oh.
yeah.
[ southern accent ] oh, i'm mr. straight axle.
hey, y'all.
oh, i'm gonna make it to the top 'cause i got a straight axle.
oh.
[ laughs ] y'all watch this.
[ normal voice ] i.f.s. and all, i'm going to the top.
wood:
after tanner's gratuitous burnout, he had little tread left on his tires, so he was at a disadvantage.
all i had to do was make it to the top.
all right, silverado, it's you and me.
i know you can do this.
let's build a little boost, and then let's take off.
what?
oh, there it is.
yeah, hi-ho, silverado!
away!
oh, hello!
yeah!
look at that!
dig it!
i'm glad i don't work here if that's the runaway-truck thing.
right.
you feel like you're gonna have a problem with this?
not at all.
i'll show you.
ferrara:
rutledge made it up the hill with ease.
now all i had to do was get to the top, and we would have tanner exactly where we wanted him.
okay.
go for it.
goodbye.
that's it.
see?
step on the gas and climb the hill like a man.
like a ram!
ha ha!
aaah!
[ chuckles ] that is just crazy.
wood:
our trap was set.
tanner may have thought this was an easy challenge, but a slow climb like this requires good traction.
are you ready?
[ laughs ]
yes.
there he goes.
oh, hey.
that is dangerous.
that's digging.
we are really going for it.
you see that solid axle just jumping?
he's spinning!
[ laughs ] yes!
yes!
he's spinning!
come on!
you're super!
[bleep] it.
[ laughs ]
yes!
that's it!
okay.
one more try at it.
[ laughs ]
just a second!
no way!
give it up!
let it go!
use your super powers!
it's just getting lower and lower.
it's just digging and digging and digging.
[ coughing ] oh!
dude, is that thing buried to the axle?
yeah.
look at it.
half a tire's in there.
damn it.
[ both laughing ]
here's the thing.
there's no thing!
here's the thing
it's the tread from the burnouts.
ferrara:
yeah.
[ laughs ]
you know what?
you're absolutely right.
that was a pile of super "duty.
[ laughs ] there you go.
look at him.
if you hadn't spent all that time riding circles and donuts around us, you'd have plenty of tires left.
i can do burnouts.
that
you lost.
there's
because the
let it go.
i know.
you're gonna be up for days.
god, it feels so sweet when you suck at something.
i know.
oh, it feels good!
you know what?
i'm not done here.
there's more.
i think the chevy can do way more stuff than this.
i know the ram can.
ferrara:
we had successfully given tanner a beatdown, but our toughest truck challenge wasn't over.
the real test for a pickup is towing capacity, so we set out once and for all to see who had the toughest truck.
i'm telling you, this is a great plan.
this is a great plan." remember those words.
towing capacity.
what's yours?
24,400.
[ laughs ]
that is a lot.
but that's super-duty, so it's obviously on a different scale.
mine's almost 30,000.
what?
it's 22,000.
that's almost 30,000.
i'm just
just a little bit-- i'm 21,700.
21 what?
aha.
21,700.
so, this is one i'm ready for.
what do you got?
well, look, here's the deal.
we've seen all the commercials when people test trucks.
it's always, "oh, you can out-pull this guy pulling a boat or a trailer.
what does that have to do with telephone poles?
well, i just saw it, and i thought that'd be a cool thing to pull down.
i respect the destructive nature in you.
well?
let's let it happen.
okay.
in many famous man's words, "watch this.
does he know they're all hooked together?
this telephone pole stands at about 4 stories high and is dug 20 feet into the ground.
pulling it down is a perfect way to demonstrate my chevy's towing power.
this is a great idea.
yes.
he's gonna electrocute all of us.
no.
yeah.
i'll be okay.
just keep your feet off the ground.
here.
this is the stuff you dream about when you're a kid right here.
oh, i wonder if you can pull a telephone pole down with a truck.
i really like the idea, but it is one of the dumber ideas we've had on this show.
pretty cool.
four-wheel drive.
chevy, i know you can do it.
here i go!
[ wood cracking ]
yeah.
get angry at it, rutledge.
come on!
let's go!
i'm in full support of whatever's about to happen.
there it goes.
it's coming down!
[ laughing ]
he got two!
did you see that?
that was beautifully stupid!
i just ripped a telephone pole down!
[ laughs ]
chevy!
but, to be fair, that's not really towing.
it's pulling.
i don't think that was all that impressive.
and you were hooked up to the top.
they look like they're gonna fall over on their own.
i tried to get one, and i got two!
it sounded rotten-- the wood did.
why don't you show me something cooler?
i think i saw something.
let's go.
you did awesome!
you did awesome, chevy!
two poles.
somebody's gonna have to clean all this up, you know.
foust:
rutledge's first annual telephone-pole pull-down was entertaining, but it wasn't the best way to show off a truck's towing capacity.
to show them my ford was the toughest truck,
i found the biggest and heaviest thing around.
i don't think pulling down a couple toothpicks really shows what a truck can do.
i agree with you, but this?
yeah.
this shows what a truck can do.
[ engine turns over ]
there's no way you're gonna be able to pull a train.
you have an engine and a coal car, all right?
do you know how much that weighs?
that is 140 tons back there.
280,000 pounds of steel and iron.
and what's your tow capacity?
just shy of that.
okay.
it's not load-rated for what we're about to do, but i just want to prove to you why ford is the ultimate truck.
this is what "made in america" means, my friends.
step back.
i'm gonna get a good vantage point here.
truck, train.
ferrara:
truck, train, coal car.
moron.
this is never gonna work.
this is 140 tons.
280,000 pounds of train.
there's no way i can tow this.
yep!
oh, you almost got it!
come on!
now it's time for a part of the show we like to call "big star, small car.
that's where we put a celebrity in our suzuki to see who can set the fastest lap time.
and our big star is one of my favorite comedians,
bill engvall!
[ cheers and applause ]
all right.
you ready for this, pal?
i am ready for this.
i've watched the show.
big fan of the show.
i've signed the will, and my kids are taken care of, and everything that needed to be evacuated got evacuated, so...
[ laughter ] good.
good.
i'm ready to do this.
look, we can hose out anything that comes out of you.
yeah, i noticed it was all
it's all tefloned and all that, so that's good.
okay.
so, you get in there.
you tear it up.
i'm gonna take the audience, and we will meet you back at the hangar.
we'll see you in the hangar.
all right.
let's go.
go get 'em, pal.
come on.
all right.
here we go
the dumbest thing i've ever done.
[ engine revs ]
ferrara:
all right.
he's off to a good start.
until now.
here comes the first turn.
stay composed behind the wheel.
sometimes you have to go slower to go faster.
i turned on the wipers.
[ laughs ]
apparently heard it's gonna rain.
bill is approaching a turn called the teardrop.
you cannot carry a lot of speed through here 'cause you will spin out.
oh, that was nice.
this is where you can really just get on it.
all right.
now we're getting the speed.
there's an 85.
oh, my god. 90.
haven't taken out a camera.
that's good.
he pretty good past the tires.
whoo!
[ laughs ]
[ laughing ] and he's having a good time.
[ tires squeal ]
oh, my god.
this thing's got some juice.
there you go.
this is cameraman's curve coming up.
oh, that went nice.
very nice.
there we go.
now taking it home, baby!
daddy's hauling the mail!
okay.
here comes daddy with the mail around the last turn.
and he is across the line.
that was better than sex.
let me tell you that right now.
[ chuckles ]
i'm gonna need a cigarette after this is over.
[ cheers and applause ]
bill, come on up!
bill, come on up here.
bill engvall!
good to see you, my friend.
it was great.
wow.
how was that, brother?
did you have fun?
that was crazy.
yeah?
there was times that it s really fun.
mm-hmm.
and then there was times i had things puckering
i didn't know i had.
[ laughter ]
that's a lot like marriage.
[ laughing ] exactly.
how'd you like the suzuki?
you know what?
i got to tell you, i was impressed with that little car.
really?
it has a little pep to it.
you need to raise your goals.
[ laughter ]
[ applause ]
i will tell you that i was
that when the show called and said,
would you want to be on?" i said, "of course.
and they said, "if you want to bring your own car, you can.
and so i looked at my wife, who has an aston martin vantage...
[ crowd "oohs" ]
and i said, "honey," and she goes, "no.
no.
[ laughter ]
so, your wife has an aston?
she has an aston.
i have a '50 chevy pickup that i've had redone.
i have a '77 volkswagen van.
you still smoke pot?
yeah.
[ laughter ]
[ applause ]
but it's all medical now.
yeah.
it's all purely medical.
it the glaucoma.
and then i have a mercedes s600, which i just love.
that's big.
yeah.
and i love that car, but when you step on the gas, you hear this...
[ inhales deeply ]
and just watch the gauge just go...
'cause it's 12-cylinder.
what was your first car?
my first car ever was a 1962 ford falcon, and it was...
[ crowd murmurs ] yeah.
it was a two-door, three on the tree, and i tricked that thing out.
[ laughter ]
you pimped out a '62
i had a shag carpet in the back window.
[ laughter ]
yeah.
oh, it gets better.
i had a metal foot for a gas pedal.
[ laughter ]
and then i put my own 8-track in.
[ laughter ]
and had a date that night, so i got my best make-out music.
it was the "best of bread" 8-track.
[ laughing ] bread?
and i'm driving.
i pop that 8-track in.
i'm just driving.
all of a sudden, i realize that the whole car has filled up with smoke because i've short-wired it somehow.
[ laughter ] it was a great car for me because it was a great make-out car because the passenger seat, if you put enough weight on it, would fall backwards.
[ laughter ]
insta-bed.
now, let me ask.
did you discover that, or did you rig that to happen?
no, i actually
it actually happened by accident.
my girlfriend at the time and i were parking outside of her house.
and i leaned over to make my move, and the seat just went-- chprrkkw!
and she said, "well, this is convenient.
[ laughter ]
yes, it is.
and i don't know why ford never put that option in another car because...
well, i am so happy you're here, and you really enjoyed the lap?
oh, i had the greatest time.
yeah?
how do you think you did?
how fast you think you did?
i don't know.
i'm looking at those times, and i think i just
i worry that i'm gonna be slower than chumlee.
i got to beat buzz aldrin.
what is he
like 90?
yeah.
[ laughter ]
but that's in moon time.
oh!
but let me tell you something.
you did it in 1... 40... 4...
oh!
point 3.
oh!
[ cheers and applause ]
all right, all right.
yeah!
took down bret michaels, baby!
that's it, man.
oh!
that's impressive.
my pal bill engvall.
[ cheers and applause ]
so, now, you're originally from texas?
correct.
big trucks in texas.
if you don't have a truck, then there's no point in driving anything.
[ laughter ]
what's
in your opinion, what's the best dually?
best dually for my money would have to be the dodge ram.
you're absolutely right.
it is the dodge ram, which you will see as we get back to our toughest-truck challenge.
this is what "made in america" means, my friends.
step back.
i'm gonna get a good vantage point here.
ferrara:
yep!
oh, you almost got it!
come on!
go!
come on!
it's moving!
yes!
that's what i'm talking about!
wood:
there is no way he is pulling a train right now.
are you kidding me?
yes!
yeah, but it's on wheels.
yeah.
it's on wheels.
doesn't count.
you know what?
doesn't count!
it's a train.
on wheels.
no big deal.
not impressive at all.
i'll show you something impressive.
watch the ram.
follow me, thomas.
[ laughs ]
that's funny.
that's about thomas the tank engine.
it's a kids' show.
thomas
he's a train.
he's on an island, and the front of the train is his face.
what's the island called?
sodor.
so sad.
there's percy.
there's thomas.
there's clara.
there's a whole bunch of them.
there's a whole gang of them.
ferrara:
so, to top tanner's ford pulling a 280,000-pound train,
i needed something massive, something gargantuan, something so big
i could prove that my ram was the toughest truck.
two termite-infested telephone poles and a train on wheels.
speak not.
just watch.
watch and learn.
here comes the ram, boys!
it was a 280,000-pound train.
ferrara:
on wheels!
cables were still
i mean, it was a functioning telephone pole.
[ laughs ]
such a bad idea.
we're gonna pull down a house.
[ laughs ]
ferrara:
our toughest-truck challenge had come down to towing capacity.
tanner's ford pulling a 280,000-pound train was pretty impressive.
but i was ready to bring down the house.
such a bad idea.
come on, baby.
let's show them what a ram can do, huh?
this is gonna be great.
total catastrophe.
you ready, fellas?
foust:
uh...
is there an answer to that question, really?
here we go.
do you feel confident in his ability to do this?
no.
he's gonna mess this all up, and it's a house.
start moving.
oh, my gosh.
hey, you're just digging a hole.
well, that was impressive.
watch him figure this out.
this should be good.
remain calm!
all is well!
that house is just laughing at you.
no, he's gonna yank it now.
oh, this is gonna look bad.
[ both laugh ]
huh!
almost there!
rome wasn't built in a day, fellas!
go big or go home!
oh, don't [bleep]
don't say that.
don't say that to him. [ laughs ]
ohh!
[ laughs ]
ha ha!
i think you did it!
[ laughing ] i'm pretty sure you just pulled that house down.
[ laughing ]
you pulled this house down.
i feel like a lot of asbestos just went into my lungs.
are you okay?
that was awesome.
yeah.
so, i think we proved that the ram is the toughest truck.
the house is-- first of all, it's not as heavy as the train.
this thing was falling in on itself.
those telephone poles were in the ground.
those telephone poles were put up during the eisenhower administration.
will you stop it?
maybe.
they were still in there.
but they were rotten anyway.
and the train
the train-- a good wind could have blown that train.
it was on wheels and on the track.
this was a house.
gentlemen, i pulled down a house.
it's pretty impressive.
you took a lot of tries, though.
we need to go before these people get home.
okay.
that's actually a good call.
[ cheers and applause ]
gentlemen, i hope you were paying attention, because that's how you prove you have the toughest dually.
you pull down a house.
[ cheers and applause ]
yes!
i got to admit, i'm kind of confused at what that has to do with having a dually.
like, basically, people buy these trucks for towing, right?
i'm pretty much the only one that actually towed anything.
there's no description when people look in a magazine for trucks.
let's see.
has it pulled down a house?
oh, yeah, it has.
[ laughter ]
has it, over its load capacity, pulled a train 8 feet?
oh, that's not on there, either.
wait a minute, honey.
this pulled down telephone poles.
this is the truck for us.
there's a footnote for that.
and for drag racing.
who buys pickups for speed unless you're robbing a walgreens in georgia?
[ laughter ]
i'll tell you who buys trucks for speed
everyone that buys a cool truck.
[ cheers and applause ] thank you.
you beat me by 4 inches, maybe.
uh, i don't think that matters.
i beat you.
you smoked the tires in the burnout, and then we tied on the truck ramp, which means the chevy is the strongest truck in america!
see you next time!
yeah.
yeah, it is.
i'm sorry.
it's the strongest truck.
__file_terminal__
long ago, in the year of our lord 326 a.d., a great prophet is leader of the nephite people in ancient upstate new york.
his name... is mormon.
i... am mormon.
my people sailed here from israel to create a new civilization.
these golden plates tell of our people and how we met with...
jesus christ.
i... am jesus.
take care of your golden plates, mormon, for soon, your entire civilization will be gone and nobody will remember you.
just before the nephite people were wiped out, mormon gave the plates to his son, moroni.
i... am moroni, the last of my kind.
i shall bury the golden plates, father, and perhaps one day someone very special will find them.
and lo, moroni buried the golden plates high on a hill.
centuries later the golden plates were found, giving birth to the fastest-growing religion today!
a church that even now sends missionaries out all over the world!
hello!
my name is elder price
and i would like to share with you the most amazing book
hello!
my name is elder grant
it's a book about america a long, long time ago
it has so many awesome parts
you simply won't believe how much this book can change your life
hello!
my name is elder green
i would like to share with you this book of jesus christ
hello!
my name is elder young
did you know that jesus lived here in the usa?
you can read all about it now
in this nifty book, it's free!
no, you don't have to pay
hello!
my name is elder smith
and can i leave this book with you for you to just peruse?
hello!
(hello!
) i'll just leave it here
it has a lot of information you can really use
hello!
(hi!
) my name is – (jesus christ!
you have a lovely home (hello!
it's an amazing book!
bonjour!
(hola!
) ni hao!
me llamo elder white (are these your kids?
this book gives you the secret to eternal life (sound good?
eternal life (with jesus christ!
is super fun!
(hello!
) (ding dong!
and if you let us in we'll show you how it can be done!
(no thanks?
you sure?
that's fine (goodbye!
have fun in hell (hey, now!
you simply won't believe how much this book will change your life
this book will change your life this book will change your life
hello, would you like to change religions?
i have a free book written by jesus!
no, no, no, elder cunningham!
that's not how we do it!
you're making things up again.
just stick to the approved dialogue.
elders, show him!
hello!
my name is (elder cunningham!
and we would like to share with you this book of jesus christ
hello!
ding dong!
heigh ho!
just take this book!
it's free!
for you!
from me!
you see?
you simply won't believe
how much this book will change your life!
this book will change your life!
so you won't burn in...
hell-o!
you're gonna die someday
but if you read this book you'll see that there's another way
spend eternity with friends and family
we can fully guarantee you that this book will change your life
(hello!
) this book will change your life
(hello!
) this book will change your life
this book will change your life
the book of mormon (mormon!
hello!
all right, elders, all right!
that was very good indeed!
you have been training for two years and you are now ready to go out and spread the word.
in a moment you will be assigned your mission companions and locations.
oh boy, this is it guys, this is it!
i can't believe the day is finally here!
we're gonna get to go out and see the world!
do you have any idea where they're sending you, elder price?
well of course we don't really have final say over where we get sent, but...
i have been praying to be sent to my favorite place in the whole world.
oh, well if you prayed for a location,
i'm sure heavenly father will make it happen.
you're like the smartest, best, most deserving elder this center has ever seen.
aw come on guys.
the most important time of a mormon kid's life is his mission.
a chance to go out and help heal the world, that's my mission
soon i'll be off in a different place helping the whole human race
i know my mission will be something incredible!
elders, form a line,
and step forward when your name is called.
elder young
yes sir!
your mission brother will be...
elder grant.
that's me!
hey brother!
and your mission location is...
norway.
oh wow!
norway!
land of gnomes!
and trolls!
hoo-wah!
hey-yah!
shoo-wah!
zala wow!
two by two, we're marching door to door.
'cause god loves mormons and he wants some more.
a two-year mission is our sacrifice
we are the army of the church of jesus christ ...of latter-day saints!
two by two, and today we'll know
who we'll make the journey with and where we'll go
we're fighting for a cause but we're really really nice
we are the army of the church of jesus christ ...of latter-day saints!
elder white and elder smith.
oh!
i knew we'd get paired together!
your location will be...
france!
land of ...
crêpes and berets!
two by two, i guess it's you and me
we're off to preach across land and sea
satan has a hold of france!
we need to knock him off his perch!
we are the soldiers of the army of the church ...of jesus christ of latter-day saints!
elder cross and elder green, you will be serving in...
japan.
oh, japan!
land of soy sauce!
and mothra!
elder harris and elder brown.
heavenly father, where will i go on my mission
will it be china or old mexico on my mission?
it could be san fran by the bay, australia where they say "g'day", but i pray i'm sent to my favorite place:
orlando
i love you orlando.
sea world and disney and putt putt golfing!
elder price.
yes sir!
your brother will be...
elder cunningham.
that's me!
hello!
oh, hi.
and your mission location is...
uganda.
uganda?
cool...
where is that?
africa.
oh boy!
like lion king.
two by two, and now it's time to go
our paths have been revealed, so let's start the show
our shirts are clean and pressed and our haircuts are precise
we are the army of the church we are the army of the church
we are the army of the church of jesus christ!
two by two we march to victory
armed with the greatest book in history
we'll convert everyone all across the planet earth.
that is the beauty of, the essence of, the purpose of, the mission of the soldiers of the army of the church of jesus christ ...of latter-day saints!
all right, elders, all right!
go home and pack your things.
tomorrow, your missions begin.
bye you guys!
i am so stoked we got paired together, elder price.
oho, me too.
this is... fantastic!
you know what?
i prayed to heavenly father that we would get paired together.
he really does listen!
he answered your prayers?
yep, my mom said "if heavenly father is proud of you, he'll always give you what you ask.
you and me for two years in ukuhanda!
this is gonna be awesome!
yes, well, if we have the book of mormon, it'll do those africans a lot of good.
well, see you tomorrow, companion.
tomorrow is a latter day!
goodbye, son.
we're so proud of you.
wow, i can't believe kevin is going to africa for two years...
i'm gonna miss my brother so much.
aw i know.
i'm gonna miss you guys too.
hey, maybe we should see if there's anyway i could get transferred someplace a little bit closer to home, like uh...
florida, or...
no, don't worry, son.
heavenly father has a hand in everything.
he knows what's best.
he always knows.
you're right, dad.
i'm sure i'm gonna have an amazing time.
alright son, just remember:
do whatever elder price does.
he is a great mormon, and you, well, you're a... great follower.
right!
i'm a follower.
elder price seems like a wonderful boy, arnold!
uh... oh, he is.
we're gonna have the most amazing time together.
it's like, like i'm finally gonna have a best friend.
ohoho, well, just remember what we talked about with regards to your little problem.
oh don't worry dad, my little problem is "in check.
it's not gonna be an issue.
what's the little problem?
oh, nothing.
he uh ju-, well, he has a very active imagination.
i lie a lot!
no!
it's just he sometimes makes things up when he doesn't know what else to say.
bishop donahue said it's because i have no self-esteem and desperately want to fit in with by my peers.
well alright everybody,
i think it's time we leave these two to their work.
boy you boys have a lot of catching up to do now that you're companions.
this is it, elders.
you're heading... to africa.
well how did you like that, boys?
a real lion king send-off.
we got mrs. brown to sing like an african for you.
thanks, dad.
that was great!
well, good luck in africa, boys!
i've never been, but i hear it's a hoot!
well, goodbye, son, and please be careful.
now you get out there and you baptize those africans, boy!
bye, mrs. brown!
bye, baby.
well?
this is you and me now, companion.
yup, that's right, elder.
from this point on, according to rule #72, we are never allowed to go anywhere without each other.
except the bathroom.
yes, that's right.
this is so awesome!
because all my friends always end up leaving me, but you can't!
okay, favorite movies:
are you a star wars guy or are you a star trek guy?
i wanna know everything about you.
personally i like star wars, but i'm willing to like star trek if you think it's better?
okay elder, uh...
look, i like to have fun just as much as the next guy, you know, but um, look, things are different now.
we are men.
this is our time to prove that we are worthy.
worthy of what?
of everything we've been promised in the afterlife
i've always had the hope that on the day i go to heaven
heavenly father will shake my hand and say:
you've done an awesome job, kevin
now it's our time to go out
my best friend
to set the world's people free.
we can do it together, you and me, but mostly me!
you and me, but mostly me are gonna change the world forever
'cause i can do most anything
and i can stand next to you and watch
every hero needs a sidekick every captain needs a mate
every dinner needs a side dish
on a slightly smaller plate
and now we're seeing eye to eye!
it's so great we can agree
that heavenly father has chosen you and me
just mostly me
something incredible i'll do something incredible
i wanna be the mormon who changed all of mankind
my best friend
it's something i've foreseen and now that i'm nineteen
i'll do something incredible that blows god's freaking mind!
and as long as we stick together
and i stay out of your way
out of my way
we'll change the world forever
and make tomorrow a latter day!
mostly me!
so quit thinking about it and do it
how ready and psyched are we?
and life is about to change for you and life is about to change for me
and life is about to change for you and me
but me mostly
and there's no limit to what we can do...
me and you...
but mostly...
me!
well, looks like we made it, huh?
yeah, that was...
that was one long trip.
i'll say!
here we are in kitguli, uganda, and what do you think of uganda, elder?
well uum, i think it's really different!
yeah, it's different.
yeah yeah!
what have we here, maybe?
german?
british?
american.
hello sir.
uh, we're here to see mister mafala hatimbi.
yeah.
your bags!
oh uh, sir, we don't have anything illegal in there, sir.
uh, we're from the church of jesus christ of latter day saints.
here are some men with guns searching through our bags.
shut up!
we take these bags!
what?
this is your tariff...
to the general!
the, the general?
let i get one thi
you shut the fuck up!
you want to die?
omigosh!
okay
just take the bags!
why are you doing this?
ahh, there you are!
i have been looking all over for you.
i am mafala hatimbi.
i have been hired to show you to your building.
look, some men just took our bags.
you must be very careful around here.
now let's get going!
uh no, uh, shouldn't you call the police and see if we can get our bags back?
oho, the police...
the police are in kampala, two days' drive away.
there's a lot of really important stuff in those bags.
oh well, "hasa diga eebowai.
'scuse me?
you're in northern uganda now, and in this part of africa, we all have a saying.
whenever something bad happens, we just throw our hands to the sky and say "hasa diga eebowai!
hasa diga eebowai?
it's the only way to get through all these troubled times.
there's war, poverty, famine...
but having a saying makes it all seem better!
there isn't enough food to eat hasa diga eebowai
people are starving in the street hasa diga eebowai
hasa diga eebowai!
well, that's pretty neat!
does it mean no worries for the rest of our days?
kind of!
we've had no rain in several days (hasa diga eebowai!
and eighty percent of us have aids (hasa diga eebowai!
many young girls here get circumcised their clits get cut right off (way oh!
and so we say up to the sky hasa diga eebowai!
hasa diga eebowai!
now you try!
just stand up tall, tilt your head to the sky, and list off the bad things in your life.
somebody took our luggage away (hasa diga eebowai!
the plane was crowded and the bus was late
(hasa diga eebowai!
when the world is getting you down there's nobody else to blame (way oh!
raise your middle finger to the sky and curse his rotten name
wait, what?
hasa diga eebowai!
am i saying that right?
excuse me, sir, but what exactly does that phrase mean?
well, let's see... "eebowai" means "god", and "hasa diga" means "fuck you!".
so i guess in english it would be, "fuck you, god!" (hasa diga eebowai!
what?
when god fucks you in the butt, (hasa diga eebowai!
fuck god back right in his cunt (hasa diga eebowai!
hasa diga eebowai!
what a nifty phrase!
hasa diga eebowai hasa diga eebowai
you have to stop saying that!
what?
hasa diga...
no!
it means something very bad.
what?
they're saying f you to heavenly father!
f you heavenly father?
holy moly!
i said it like thirteen times!
hasa diga eebowai!
(fuck you, god!
) hasa diga eebowai!
(fuck you, god!
excuse me, sir, but you should really not be saying that.
things aren't always as bad as they seem.
oh, really?
well, take this fucking asshole, mutumbo, here.
he got caught last week trying to rape a baby.
what!
why?
some people in his tribe believe that having sex with a virgin will cure their aids.
there aren't many virgins left, so some of them are turning to babies.
but... that's horrible!
i know!
(hasa diga eebowai!
here's the butcher, he has aids here's the teacher, she has aids
here's the doctor, he has aids – here's my daughter she has a wonderful disposition!
she's all i have left in the world
and if either of you lays a hand on her...
i will give you my aids!
if you don't like what we say try living here a couple days
watch all your friends and family die hasa diga eebowai!
fuck you!
fuck you...
hasa diga eebowai!
fuck you, god, in the ass, mouth, and cunt-a
fuck you in the eye!
fuck you, god, in the ass, mouth, and cunt-a
fuck you in the other eye!
hasa diga eebowai!
fuck you, fuck you god
hasa diga eebowai!
fuck you, fuck you god
hasa diga eebowai!
fuck you, fuck you god
hasa diga!
fuck you god!
in the cunt!
fuck you, god!
this is where my father asked me to bring you.
the others like you should be inside.
thank you very much, jam ban chofi.
nabulungi.
nam ban chofi.
ah, i'm sorry.
we, we really appreciate your help, nabulungi.
oh hey, hey...
um, heh, um, um, look, maybe, maybe sometime elder cunningham and i could, could talk to you, maybe tell you a little bit about the church of jesus christ of latter day saints?
i, i have to get back to my village, but i am always there if you would like to talk.
just, just one piece of advice:
no matter how hot you get at night, keep your windows closed.
it is the only way to protect against the scorpions.
and the mosquitoes.
and the lions.
and the murderers and the robbers, and the aids, and the snakes, and the safari ants, which can actually plant their eggs underneath your skin and eat you from the inside out.
man elder, can you believe this?
i know, she is such a hot shade of black, right?
she's like, she's like a latte.
let's go inside and meet the other elders, alright?
hello?
the new recruits are here!
welcome elder price and elder cunningham.
i am elder mckinley, current district leader for this area of the uganda mission.
nice to meet you.
and my name is elder church, originally from the great city of cheyenne, wyoming.
elder michaels from provo.
elder thomas, but the elders here all call me elder pop-tart, 'cause i love them so much.
and over there are elder neeley and elder davis.
whoa, that's a lot to remember.
let's sit, let's sit.
well, we've all been together about three months now, spreading the word of christ, saving the souls of the fine ugandan people through baptism.
well uh, how many have you baptized so far?
uh... zero.
that's practically nothing.
zero, yes, but there's always hope that tomorrow will be different.
right!
because tomorrow is a latter day!
hey, are you alright, partner?
yeah.
i'm just ah...
i'm just getting a little confused... right now, so.
oh, confused.
well elder, that is natural.
there are certainly a lot of things here in uganda that can be... disturbing.
but your mission has officially started.
which means you have to do what we have all done.
i got a feelin' that you could be feelin'
a whole lot better than you feel today
you say you got a problem?
well that's no problem
it's super-easy not to feel that way
when you start to get confused because of thoughts in your head
don't feel those feelings
hold them in instead
turn it off
like a light switch just go click
it's a cool little mormon trick we do it all the time
when you're feelin' certain feelings that just don't seem right
treat those pesky feelings like a reading light
and turn them off like a light switch
just go bap really, what's so hard about that?
turn it off!
right?
okay
when i was young my dad would treat my mom real bad
every time the utah jazz would lose
he'd start a-drinkin' and i'd start a-thinkin'
how am i gonna keep my mom from getting abused?
i'd see her all scared and my soul was dyin'
my dad would say to me "now don't you dare start cryin'!
turn it off
like a light switch just go click
it's our nifty little mormon trick
turn it off!
turn.
it.
off!
my sister was a dancer but she got cancer
the doctor said she still had two months more
i thought she had time so i got in line
for the new iphone at the apple store
she lay there dying with my father and mother
her very last words were "where is my brother?
turn it off!
bid those sad feelings adieu
the fear that i might get cancer too...
when i was in fifth grade i had a friend, steve glade
he and i were close as two friends could be
one thing led to another, and soon i would discover
(wow!
i was having really strange feelings for steve...
i thought about us on a deserted island
we'd swim naked in the sea, and then he'd try and...
woah!
turn it off!
like a light switch
there it's gone!
(good for you!
my hetero side just won!
i'm all better now
boys should be with girls, that's heavenly father's plan
so if you ever feel you'd rather be with a man
turn it off!
well, elder mckinley,
i think it's okay that you're having gay thoughts.
just so long as you never act upon them.
no, 'cause then you're just keepin' it down
like a dimmer switch on low...
thinking nobody needs to know
but that's not true!
being gay is bad, but lying is worse
so just realize you have a curable curse,
and turn it off!
(turn it off!
turn it off!
now, how do you feel?
the same.
then you've only got yourself to blame
you didn't pretend hard enough
imagine that your brain is made of tiny boxes
then find the box that's gay and
crush it!
okay?
no, no.
i'm not having gay thoughts.
alright!
it worked!
yay!
he turned it ooooff!
(turned it off!
turn it off!
like a light switch
just go 'click'!
(click click!
what a cool little mormon trick (trick trick!
we do it all the time!
when you're feelin' certain feelings that just don't seem right
treat those pesky feelings like a reading light
and turn it off!
like a light switch on a cord and now he isn't gay any
turn it, turn it, turn it, turn it...
turn it...
turn it off!
(off!
alright elders, alright.
our two new missionaries must be exhausted from all their travels.
let's show them their room so they can unpack.
a six, seven, eight.
tada.
all right!
check it out!
we get to sleep right next to each other!
alright elders, get settled in.
now, according to missionary rules, lights out promptly at 10, and we all wake up at exactly 6:30.
i've heard a lot of great things about you, elder price.
i'm really hopin' you can...
turn things around here.
hoho, don't worry.
we will.
elders, we're glad you're here.
heavenly father, as we prepare to turn in for the night, we ask that you give us the...
the strength to spread your wisdom and also, and also the knowledge
do you think frodo was really the hero of the lord of the rings?
sometimes i think it was actually samwise that did everything.
what?
i mean think about it:
who got the ring back from gollum?
hm?
oh!
samwise.
and who pulled frodo up the side of the mountain?
just think about however to
i remember now!
samwise gamgee did it!
okay um, uh, elder,
maybe we should have some companionship evaluation time.
oh, yeah!
alright!
uh, you clearly...
have a great passion for uh... for, for things.
and, and and you like to talk about... stuff?
um, i was wondering if maybe uh, the things and stuff you seem to be focusing on are the things and stuff that apply to the reason we are here.
can you do that for me?
i'd do anything for you!
i'm your best friend.
well, all right...
let's get some sleep, huh?
yeah...
oh yeah.
sleep now, little buddy, put your cares aside
nappy with a happy face, i am by your side
what are you doing?
i'm just trying to make you feel better.
i feel fine.
but this is what i'm talking about.
your focus needs to be on our work.
do you understand how difficult this is gonna be?
the missionaries here have yet to baptize a single person.
well, if they had already baptized a bunch of people here, then it wouldn't be so incredible when you did it, now would it?
i guess.
i guess that's sort of true...
don't worry.
i'm not gonna let you down.
today we're gonna bring lots of africans to the church.
i just know it.
you know what, elder?
you're alright.
really?
yeah.
evening star shines brightly, god makes life anew!
sleep now, tighty night!
and i am here for you.
i am here for you, too.
we are here, for us.
goodnight, best friend!
goodnight, pal.
nabulungi!
where have you been?
baba, look what i found in the market!
what have i told you about wandering off?
the market is not safe!
but baba, i finally found one.
a texting device.
now i can text all of my friends.
listen to me woman!
do not go to the market again!
the general is mutilating girls in the next village over!
baba i'm sorry.
nabulungi, we must be careful.
if we want to stay alive, our village needs to lay low and not attract any attention.
city lights here we go from northern ligh...
let's go out and get some placements!
right!
uh, what's a placement again?
a placement is getting somebody to take a book of mormon.
if you give one out, that counts as a placement.
remember?
right, i knew that...
look, maybe you should just let me do the talking and you can sort of support what i'm saying by going "oh wow" and stuff like that.
yeah!
yeah, like one of those infomercials.
you know how they have, how they always have some guy trying to sell something and then, there's always some lady standing next to them saying "oh wow, what an incredible offer!
i'm, i'm like that lady!
okay.
yeah!
okay, whatever.
uh, what do you say we just start with this little house, huh?
we just walk up like we're at the missionary training center.
okay!
there's no doorbell!
there isn't any doorbell!
what do you want?
oh...
hello ma'am, do you ever feel like there's something missing from your life?
um, when you go to sleep at night, do you sometimes feel a power stirring inside you?
yes.
that's how i feel.
oh.
you sir!
come on down here, huh?
do you find yourself asking questions about this feeling?
yes.
and it's because... you want to believe in something else, isn't it?
no, it's because i have maggots in my scrotum.
you've got what?
i have maggots in my scrotum.
can you tell?
well, uh, you, you should probably see the doctor.
i am the doctor.
just calm down, calm down!
i got this.
ladies and gentlemen, we would like to tell you all about a very special book.
eh, what kind of book?
well, this book tells you how to find paradise... through christ.
they've heard of the bible.
we all have.
banbanchelfi.
hey girl.
people come and tell us about jesus and him dying for our sins once a year.
they always come, tell us the story, and leave!
nothing is better!
your bible doesn't work.
well of course that didn't work.
those were christian missionaries.
we're mormons.
what's the difference?
we've got a little more...
pizzazz.
a touch more rock 'n' roll.
and most important, a hip new prophet by the name of joseph smith.
have you heard of the all-american prophet?
the blond-haired, blue-eyed voice of god?
he didn't come from the middle east like those other holy men,
the most blessed prophet was all-american!
i'm gonna take you back to biblical times. 1823.
an american man named joe livin' on a farm
in the holy land of upstate new york!
you mean the mormon prophet joseph smith?
that's right!
that young man spoke to god!
he spoke to god?
and god said "joe, people really need to know that the bible isn't two parts!
there's a part three to the bible, joe!
and i, god, have anointed you to dig up this part three that's buried by a tree on a hill in your backyard!
wow!
god says go to your backyard and start digging!
that makes perfect sense!
joseph smith went up on that hill and dug where he was told!
and deep in the ground joseph found shining plates of gold!
what are these golden plates?
who buried them here and why?
then appeared an angel:
his name was moroni!
i... am moroni.
the all-american angel!
my people lived here long, long ago!
this is a history of my race, please read the words within
we were jews who met with christ, but we were all-american!
but don't let anybody see these plates except for you...
they are only for you to see...
even if people ask you to show the plates to them, don't
just copy them onto normal paper
even though this might make them question if the plates are real or not...
this is sort of what god is going for...
joseph took the plates home and wrote down what he found inside
he turned those plates into a book, then he rushed into town and cried:
hey!
god spoke to me and gave me this blessed ancient tome
he has commanded me to publish it and stick it in ev'ry home!
wow!
so the bible is actually a trilogy and the book of mormon is return of the jedi?
i'm interested!
now many people didn't believe the prophet joseph smith.
they thought he made up this part three that was buried by a tree on the hill in his backyard.
many people even called joseph smith a liar.
so joe said,
this is no lie, i speak to god all the time and he told me to head west!
so i'll take my part three from the hill with the tree
feel free if you'd like to come along with me to the promised land!
paradise, on the west coast!
nothing but fruit and fields as far as the eye can see!
joe led his followers across the usa
spreading their new religion to folks along the way
they kept searching for that promised land, no promise there would be.
and as they passed through every town, the mormons would decree!
have you heard of the all-american prophet?
he found a brand-new book about jesus christ!
we're following him to paradise, we call ourselves mormon
and our new religion is all-american!
wow, this all sounds so incredibly awesome!
the mormons kept on searching for that place to settle down
but every time they thought they found it they got kicked out of town
and even though people wanted to see the golden plates
joseph never showed 'em!
i have maggots in my scrotum
um... okay...
well, anyway...
now comes the part of our story that gets a little bit sad
on the way to the promised land, mormons made people mad
joseph was shot by an angry mob and knew he'd soon be dead
and even as his life drained away, he stood by what he said:
you must now lead the people, my good friend brigham young
you're wise and pure of heart, and... all-ameri... can
oh god, why are you letting me die
without having me show people the plates?
they'll have no proof i was telling the truth or not
they'll have to believe me just... 'cause
oh...
i guess that's kinda what you were going for...
the prophet joseph smith died for what he believed in.
but his followers, they kept heading west.
and brigham young led them to paradise.
a sparkling land in utah they called salt lake city.
and we come from there today to tell you what those early settlers sang long ago!
have you heard of the all-american church
here's a pocket hand-held bible for you!
it'll all make sense if you read part 3, so follow those books from the hill with the tree!
and you'll reach the promised land too!
keep you word and then we'll also throw in a set of steak knives!
all-american!
so?
who would like their very own copy of the book of mormon?
what the fuck is a steak knife?
what the heck were you doing?
just doing my part, you know, 'cause we're supposed to be a team.
well... there's nothing in the book of mormon about steak knives!
i'm sorry.
i've never actually read it.
you what?
it's... it's just so boring!
how could i even believe that you...?
jumamosi!
he's here!
what is this?
some kind of public assembly?
my name is general koni, leader of the nra rebellion and protector!
here you don't protect anyone!
we have not signed up for your rebellion!
it is just a gang of thugs who steal and mutilate women for no reason!
for no reason?
the clitoris... is an abomination!
its voodoo power has brought a wrath upon uganda and it must be cast out!
my wife's body is none of your business!
and you are no general.
by the end of the week, all females in this village will be circumcised!
or else...
all right, they're all gone.
you have to stay indoors, nabulungi!
keep the lights off, and the windows closed!
but baba, we have to help and fight him!
we can't fight against this, nabulungi!
we just have to hope they move on!
but baba... they white boys...
what?
they said they know the answers to our problems.
i have to go check on the others!
listen to me, baba!
the mormons talked about people who were miserable like us, but they all found someplace to go.
somewhere wonderful.
i'm going to text them right now and tell them we are interested.
put that stupid thing down!
just stay inside, and do not open the door for anyone!
my mother once told me of a place with waterfalls and unicorns flying
where there was no suffering, no pain
where there was laughter instead of dying
i always thought she'd made it up to comfort me in times of pain
but now i know that place is real now i know its name
sal tlay ka siti not just a story mama told
but a village in ootah where the roofs are thatched with gold
if i could let myself believe i know just where i'd be
right on the next bus to paradise:
sal tlay ka siti
i can imagine what it must be like this perfect, happy place
i'll bet the goat meat there is plentiful,
and they have vitamin injections by the case
the warlords there are friendly they help you cross the street
and there's a red cross on every corner
with all the flour you can eat!
sal tlay ka siti the most perfect place on earth
where flies don't bite your eyeballs and human life has worth
it isn't a place of fairy tales it's as real as it can be
a land where evil doesn't exist sal tlay ka siti
and i'll bet the weather is nice there
and i'm sure the streets are clean
and i hope that when i get there i'll be able to fit in...
will i fit in?
sal tlay ka siti a land of hope and joy
and if i want to get there i just have to follow that white boy
you were right, mama, you didn't lie the place is real, and i'm gonna fly!
i'm on my way
soon life won't be so... shitty
now salvation has a name
sal tlay ka siti
o. m. gosh you guys, i am freaking out!
what is it?
i just got off the phone with the zone leader.
the mission president wants a written progress report from us this week!
a progress report?
but we don't have any baptisms.
i know that!
what are we gonna do?
okay okay okay!
hold on!
i mean, maybe we should just...
say... we had some baptisms.
what?
you mean, lie?
well...
are you an idiot?
mormons don't lie!
i once told a lie when i was 12 and i had a dream that i went to hell!
it was really spooky.
you did?
i got the worst hell dreams after the day that my sister died.
you guys have the hell dreams too?
look, we've all had the spooky hell dream, people.
i have it nightly.
the issue now is what the heck am i supposed to tell the mission president!
elder price?
what happened to you?
africa... is nothing like the lion king!
i think that movie took a lot of artistic license!
he's upset because we just saw some guy get shot in the face.
i can't continue my mission in this way!
there's absolutely nothing i can accomplish here!
elder price, you cannot lose your cool on me now!
we're about to get evaluated by the mission president!
the mission president...
that's it, i need to go talk to the
mission president and get transferred!
buddy!
buddy, i know things seem tough right now, but remember, tomorrow is a latter day!
yeah!
latter day doesn't mean tomorrow!
it means the afterlife!
reckoning!
latter day, when good people get to go to heavenly father and they get everything they've always wanted!
i'm out of here!
hey, hey!
are you forgetting rule number 23?
you may not...
leave the living quarters after 9 pm!
to heck with the rules!
i'm not wasting the most important two years of my life!
hey uh...
hold up, you forgot me!
elder cunningham!
do you also want to break rule number 23?
oh no!
what am i supposed to do?
according to rule number 23, i can't leave the living quarters after curfew!
but according to rule number 72 i can't leave my companion alone!
this is like a matrix logic trick!
rule 23, rule 72, rule 23...
i can't see!
it's been a thing since i was a kid.
i'm sorry guys, he's my best friend!
hey, come on!
we're supposed to be together at all times!
i can't do something incredible here!
okay!
stop, breathe, think!
this isn't what you want to do.
yes it is!
okay!
uhhh, right.
if that's what you want to do, then that's what we're doin'.
we're transferring.
i'm with you
i didn't say we're transferring!
i said i am.
oh i see...
look, you and me, we're s- not that compatible, alright?
well we only became best friends a few days ago.
may
and i'm not your best friend!
i just got stuck with you by the missionary training center!
i didn't mean to...
i didn't mean to say "stuck"...
it's just that
eh, yeah, yeah, it's fine.
it's, it's alright.
i know how it goes.
it's really fine.
i'll be, i'll be totally fine.
yes!
yes, you will be fine.
it's just that we...
need um... different things.
right.
you know?
right, just... different things is all.
it was really nice meeting you.
yeah...
you too.
take it easy.
evening star shines brightly god makes life anew
sleep now, tighty night i was there for you
there you are!
thank goodness i found you.
where is your friend?
uh, i don't have any friends.
no!
i have written elder price a text.
here.
it says to please come back to the village.
we are ready.
to do what?
to listen to him.
i texted everyone that we have to give elder price a chance.
well i'm sorry, he's requested a transfer.
what is a transfer?
that means he'll be sent somewhere else.
no, he can't leave.
we are ready to listen.
it's too late.
he's already made up his mind.
what about you?
me?
what?
he is gone, but you are still here.
you will lead us!
teach us everything about what is in the book of mormon!
me?
nooo!
noohoho!
i'm a follower.
everyone's waiting.
come back to the village and you will have your listeners.
i swear it.
what did jesus do when they sentenced him to die?
did he try to run away?
did he just break down and cry?
no, jesus dug down deep, knowing what he had to do
when faced with his own death, jesus knew that he had to...
man up he had to man up
so he crawled up on that cross, and he stuck it out
and he manned up christ, he manned up
and taught us all what real manning up is about
and now it's up to me, and it's time to man up
jesus had his time to, now it's mine to man up
i'm taking the reins, i'm crossing the bear
and just like jesus, i'm growing a pair!
i've gotta stand up, can't just clam up
it's time to man up!
'cause there's a time in your life when you know you've got to man up
don't let it pass you by there's just one time to man up
watch me man up like nobody else!
i'm gonna man up all over myself!
i've got to get ready it's time to, time to...
what did jesus do when they put nails through his hands?
did he scream like a girl, or did he take it like a man?
when someone had to die to save us from our sins,
jesus said, "i'll do it," and he took it on the chin!
he manned up, and manned up
he took a bullet for me and you that's man up, real man up
and now it's my time to do it too!
time to be a hero and slay the monster!
time to battle darkness you're not my father!
i'm gonna time to, just watch me go!
time to stand up and steal the show!
time to, time to, time to, time to, time to...
sal tlay ka siti, a place of hope and joy
to man up!
and if we want to go there, we just have to follow that white boy
time to!
heavenly father, why do you let bad things happen?
ka-lay-ka siti!
did you get my text?
i can't believe all the terrible things you let happen!
ka-lay-ka siti, we got your text!
i don't belong in a place like this!
(man up!
take me back to where things make sense!
a place i know where god exists:
orlando!
we will listen to the fat white guy!
my time to, time to now it's my time to, time to!
but hasa diga eebowai!
no time to, not time to now it's time to, time to!
i'm in the lead for the very first time!
i'm home with the people to show me ta
mine to!
i've got to stand up, get my flippin' can up
it's time to, time to!
man up!
sal tlay ka siti
orlando!
sal tlay ka siti
man up!
orlando!
sal tlay ka siti sal tlay...
it is time to...
i have maggots in my scrotum!
indeed, it came to pass that the prophet joseph smith discovered the book of mormon on golden plates.
but what exactly is the book of mormon about?
it tells of two hebrew tribes that walked in ancient america.
the gentle nephites, and the wicked lamanites.
they fought many great battles, but then, just after his crucifixion, christ appeared.
i... am jesus.
i've just been crucified on the other side of the world.
i only have three days before i am resurrected, but in that time i will preach here to you in america.
and lo, christ spoke of many things, and the nephites came forth and wrote the teachings on plates of gold.
plates that became the book of mormon, a book that is still today read by missionaries all over the world!
and it came to pass that the nephites did gather together a great number of men, even to exceed the number of 30,000.
uh...
and it came to pass that, in the same year, they had a number of battles in which the nephites did beat the lamanites and did slay many of them.
and what the fuck does that mean?
it means, you know, you should be nice to each other, or s- or something.
and lo!
the lord was so displeased with the lamanites that he caused a cursing to come upon them.
and wherefore as they were white and delightsome, the lord god did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them, and god said
uh...
nev- mi-, never mind, let's, let's forget that part.
how is this supposed to make things better for us?
the general is going to come back, and if he sees us here, we are all dead!
baba, please!
we just need to listen.
to what?
three hours we've been listening to him talk about stupid shit that happened on the other side of the earth thousands of years ago!
it has nothing to do with us.
yeah!
and those nephites probably didn't even have aids to deal with!
uh?
sure they did!
back then people had even worse aids!
yeah!
and lo, the lord said unto the nephites:
i know you're really depressed, what with all your aids, and everything, but there's an answer in christ.
you see?
this book can help us.
i just told a lie...
no wait, i didn't lie,
i just used my imagination
and it worked!
you're making things up again, arnold
but it worked, dad!
you're stretching the truth again and you know it
don't be a fibbing fran, arnold
joseph smith?
because a lie is a lie
it's not a lie!
you're making things up again, arnold
oh conscience!
you're taking the holy word and adding fiction
be careful how you proceed, arnold
when you fib, there's a price
ah, this is bullshit!
the story that i have been told is that the way to cure aids is by sleeping with a virgin!
ah, i'm going to go and rape a baby.
what?
oh my, no!
you can't do that!
no!
why not?
because that is definitely against god's will!
says who?
where in that book of yours does it say anything about sleeping with a baby?
huh?
nowhere!
uh, behold!
the lord said to the mormon prophet joseph smith,
you shall not have sex with that infant!
and lo joseph said, "why not, lord?
huh?
why not?
and the lord said,
if you lay with that infant, you shall... burn in the fiery pits of...
mordor!
really?
uh huh...
uh huh.
a baby cannot cure your illness, joseph smith.
i shall give unto you a... a frog." and thus, joseph laid with the frog, and his aids was no more!
you're making things up again, arnold
you're recklessly morphing the words of jesus
you can't just say what you want, arnold
come on, hobbits!
you're digging yourself a deep hole
i'm making things up again, kind of,
but this time it's helping a dozen people
it's nothing so bad, because this time
i'm not committing a sin just by making things up again!
right?
no!
elder cunningham, you have to stop him!
what?
what is it?
gotswana is going to cut off his daughter's clitoris.
huh?
this is all very interesting, but the general said that it is because our women aren't circumcised that god has brought this wrath upon us!
no, doing that to a lady is definitely against christ's will!
how do you know?
christ never said nothin' 'bout no clitoris!
yes!
yes he di-id!
in ancient new york three men were about to cut off a mormon woman's cli- toris.
but, right before they did, jesus had...
boba fett turn them into frogs!
frogs?
you mean like the frog that got fucked by joseph smith?
riiight.
riiiight, like those frogs.
for "a clitoris is holy amongst all things," said he.
you're making things up again, arnold
you're taking the holy word and adding fiction (the truth about god!
be careful how you proceed, arnold (we're going to paradise!
when you fib, there's a price
who would have thought i'd have this magic touch?
who'd have believed i could man up this much?
i'm talkin', they're listenin', my stories are glistening',
i'm gonna save them all with this stuff!
you're making things up again, arnold. (elder cunningham!
you're making things up again, arnold. (holy prophet man!
you're making things up again, arnold. (our savior!
you're making things up again...
hmm, up again making things you are
arnold...
i'm here!
this is it!
i'm here!
orlando!
ah!
it's even better than i could've imagined!
the streets are clean, the people are happy...
epcot center.
i can see the ball!
the funny thing is, i don't really remember getting here.
wait, this can't be orlando.
i don't even remember the plane landing.
what's happening to me?
where am i?
elder price!
who is that?
you broke the rules, elder!
your soul belongs to me now!
mickey?
hahaha, think again, minion!
you now dwell in eternal flame!
i remember this place!
long ago when i was five
i snuck in the kitchen late at night
and ate a doughnut with a maple glaze
my father asked who ate the snack i said that it was my brother jack
and jack got grounded for fourteen days
i've lived with that guilt all of my life
and the terrible vision that i had that night
no, please!
i don't wanna go back!
down, down thy soul is cast!
from the earth whence forth ye fell!
the path of fire leads thee to spooky mormon hell dream!
welcome back to spooky mormon hell dream!
you are having a spooky mormon hell dream now!
and now i've gone and done it again (rectus!
i committed another awful sin (dominus!
i left my mission companion all alone (spookytus!
oh god, how could i have done this to you?
(deus!
how could i break rule 72?
(creepyus!
and now my soul hath just been thrown
back into spooky mormon hell dream!
down, down to satan's realm see where you belong!
there is nothing you can do
no escape from spooky mormon hell dream!
you blamed your brother for eating the doughnut, and now you walk out on your mission companion?
you're a dick!
jesus, i'm sorry!
jesus hates you, this we know!
for jesus just told you so!
you remember lucifer?
he is even spookier!
haaa ha haaa!
bring him to meeee!
aaaahahaaaa!
minions of hades, have you heard the news?
kevin was caught playing hooky!
now he's back with all you cath'lics and jews!
it's super spooky-wooky!
i'm sorry, lord, it was selfish of me
to break the rules, please i don't wanna be
in this spooky mormon hell dream!
spooky mormon hell dream!
genghis khan, jeffrey dahmer, hitler, johnnie cochran
their spirits all surround you!
spooky, spooky, spoooo-ky!
i started a war und killed millions of jews!
i slaughtered the chinese!
i stabbed a guy and fucked his corpse!
i got oj free!
you think that's bad?
i broke rule 72!
i left my companion and i'm way worse than you!
i hate this spooky mormon hell dream!
spooky mormon hell dream!
oh, heavenly father!
please give me one more chance!
i won't break the rules again!
no, no more!
please!
spooky mormon hell dream spooky mormon hell dream
dad!
argh!
i can't believe jesus called me a dick!
welcome, welcome to spooky mormon hell dream!
you are never waking up from spooky mormon hell dream!
oh, please help me father!
please let me wake up!
give me one more chance!
i won't let you down again!
(in spooky mormon hell dream!
spooky mormon hell dream now!
spooky mormon hell dream done!
i think he's coming to.
come on, elder price.
wake up, buddy.
wait, what?
where am i?
it looks like you passed out at the bus station.
we were so worried!
oh i'm, i'm sorry.
i'm sorry that i had a little, uh meltdown, last night.
but i'm not leaving.
oh, good, good.
yeah, i realized...
that i was...
that i was wrong, and i'm gonna stay here and stick to my work!
oh.
you had the hell dream, didn't you?
was i in it?
...arnold.
oh, hey guys.
elder cunningham, where on heavenly father's green earth have you been?
oh, nowhere much, just with ten eager africans who are now interested in the church!
yes, yep, they're completely into the teachings and ready to learn more.
are you serious, elder cunningham?
that's amazing!
oh, elder price.
hey.
hey...
so, did you find yourself a new... companion?
no.
no, i didn't.
and i'm sorry about that.
but this is great, elder cunningham.
if you've got some eager followers, we could really turn things around here!
i think we should start...
preparing which verses we're going to teach them, maybe maybe prep some exercises, or find some, some music, maybe then
wooaahhh!
woh-hooaaahhh!
you left me!
remember?
yes, i know.
and i'm sorry.
but heavenly father has shown me i need to stay here!
so now what?
i'm just supposed to take you back?
elder cunningham.
we must all work in pairs.
remember?
give elder cunningham a break!
if it's working better this way, then, leave elder price out of it.
now, how many of the people want to have follow-up sessions?
oh um, let's see, all of them!
do you think we might actually get a baptism out of this?
they always say you just have to get that first baptism and the others will follow!
hold up!
i know i'm doing a really good job and all, but let's not get too carried away, i mean, a lot of the people here are so scared to death of that general koni guy.
it's true.
everywhere we go, people keep talking about general koni, and how he'll kill them.
sometime i'd like to convince that general that what he's doing is wrong.
well no one is going to change how a warlord thinks.
that would take something...
incredible.
something incredible something incredible
look, let's just be happy that elder cunningham has the people interested.
it's okay you guys!
i've got everything under control!
i know what heavenly father wants for me now.
this whole country is gonna be saved!
ever since i was a child i tried to be the best
so what happened?
my family and friends all said i was blessed
so what happened?
it was supposed to be all so exciting
to be teaching of christ 'cross the sea
but i allowed my faith to be shaken oh, what's the matter with me?
i've always longed to help the needy
to do the things i never dared
this was the time for me to step up so then why was i so scared?
a warlord who shoots people in the face
what's so scary about that?
i must trust that my lord is mightier
and always has my back
now i must be completely devout
i can't have even one shred of doubt!
i believe that the lord god created the universe
i believe that he sent his only son to die for my sins
and i believe that ancient jews built boats and sailed to america
i am a mormon and a mormon just believes
you cannot just believe partway you have to believe in it all
my problem was doubting the lord's work, instead of standing tall
i can't allow myself to have any doubt
it's time to set my worries free
time to show the world what elder price is about
and while i show them, i'll show me!
i believe that god has a plan for all of us
i believe that plan involves me getting my own planet
and i believe that the current president of the church, thomas monson, speaks directly to god!
i am a mormon, and dang it, a mormon just believes!
i know that i must go and do the things my god commands
i realize now why he sent me here!
if you ask the lord in faith he will always answer you
just believe in him and have no fear
general!
we have an intruder!
he just walked right into camp!
i believe that satan has a hold of you
i believe that the lord god has sent me here!
and i believe that in 1978 god changed his mind about black people!
you can be a mormon a mormon who just believes
what the fuck is this?
and now i can feel the excitement
this is the moment i was born to do
and i feel so incredible to be sharing my faith with you
the scriptures say that if you ask in faith
if you ask god himself, you'll know
but you must ask him without any doubt
and let your spirit grow!
i believe that god lives on a planet called kolob
i believe that jesus has his own planet as well
and i believe that the garden of eden was in jackson county, missouri
if you believe, the lord will reveal it
and you'll know it's all true you'll just feel it
you'll be a mormon!
and, by gosh, a mormon just believes!
oh, i believe!
i believe!
so,
jumamosi!
wait!
god has spoken to me, sir!
by the power of god almighty touch me not!
uh, the power of christ compels you!
wait, what are you doing?
let me go!
no!
aaaaahhh!
right, right.
so christ said, "you've gotta be strong, you know?
just because the lamanites have big death star weapons and stuff, doesn't mean you should let them run your lives, you know?
there's more of you than there are of them;
you've gotta stand up for yourselves!" christ said.
oh!
just like the way the hobbits all stood up against brigham young's killers!
very good, middala.
so, the nephites...
fought off the wicked lamanites, and for punishment the lord god turned the lamanites... yellow!
oh!
like the chinese!
right, right.
oh-kay we should probably stop there for today.
hopeful we'll see everyone again tomorrow?
the book is right: we must not fight amongst each other.
the chinese are the real problem!
i love all these mormon stories!
they are so fucking weird and interesting!
elder cunningham, i just wanted to say, we are very happy heavenly father brought you here.
oh, thank you.
i have never seen the people here so happy.
even baba.
you... are amazing.
oh.
well, i haven't really done that much.
but you have.
i texted my friend the story of joseph smith's battle with diarrhea, and he said everyone in his village has read it.
you are a great man.
thank you.
i kind of am, huh?
all the mormons are such amazing people.
they traveled across the united states to find paradise in sal tlay ka siti.
and even though they found it, they still travel the world to show others the way.
i guess i never really thought of it like that.
do you think that we are worthy enough to join you?
we have been trying very hard.
and we are ready to do whatever tasks you require of us.
oh, no, no, no, no, you don't understand.
there's nothing they have to do to become mormon.
we let anybody who wants to join up, so long as they're willing to commit to the church.
then we can... baptize them.
well then, would you like to baptize me?
shh yeah, sure, that would be... great.
okay!
let's do it!
what?
now?
why not?
well... to be honest, i've never done it before.
that's okay.
neither have i!
i guess that's true.
do you know how to baptize someone into the church?
sssure, that's something we studied over and over again at...
mission control center.
please, elder cunningham, i want to be baptized.
i swear to dedicate my life to the church.
hah, okay, i, uh, just need a second to get ready.
okay!
i'll go get ready too.
i'm about to do it for the first time
and i'm gonna do it with a girl!
a special girl
who makes my heart kinda flutter makes my eyes kinda blur
i can't believe i'm about to baptize her
he will baptize me he will hold me in his arms
and he will baptize me right in front of everyone
and it will set me free when he looks into my eyes
and he sees just how much i love being baptized
i'm gonna baptize her bathe her in god's glory
and i will baptize her with everything i got
and i'll make her beg for more as i wash her free of sin
and it'll be so good she'll want me to baptize her again
excuse me, i, i need another minute!
never known a boy so gentle
one like him is hard to find a special kind
he makes my heart kind of flutter like a moth in a cocoon
i hope he gets to baptizing me soon!
i'm gonna baptize you!
i'm through with all my stallin'
you're gonna baptize me!
i'm ready to let you do it
and it will set us free it's time to be immersed
and i'm so happy you're about to be my first!
ok.
are you ready?
i am ready.
so how do we do it?
well, i hold you like this.
yeah?
then i lower you down.
yeah?
and then i...
i just baptized her!
she got dowsed by heavenly father
i just baptized her good!
i performed like a champ!
i'm wet with salvation!
we just went all the way!
praise be to god!
i'll never forget this day
i baptized you!
i gotcha good
you wanted it more, baby!
i'll text you later.
dear mission president, it is my honor to inform you that the elders of uganda district 9 have brought twenty new members into the church.
they are all fully commited to the church of jesus christ of latter day saints, and our numbers continue to grow.
this is outstanding.
these boys have converted more africans than any district in the country.
elders of district 9, you have truly honored the church by your success.
congratulations on becoming one...
with the people... of africa.
i am africa i am africa
with the strength of the cheetah my native voice shall ring
we are africa we are the heartbeat of africa
with the rhino
the meerkat
the noble lion king
we are africa
we are the winds of the serengeti
we are the sweat of the jungle man
we are the tears of nelson mandela
we are the lost boys of the sudan!
i am africa
just like bono, i am africa
i flew in here and became one with this land
i'm not a follower anymore no, now i am africa!
with my zulu spear i run barefoot through the sand
and i am africa!
something incredible you've done something incredible
i have never seen a rectal blockage of this kind
i have seen patients in the past
with rodents or bottles in their ass
but this is something incredible and it blows my freakin' mind!
we are the snows of kilimanjaro we are gorillas in the mist
we are the galleys of the amistad we are fela's defiant fist!
we are africa
oh neosporin it's amazing!
the mission president wants to meet me personally and he's gonna give me a medal!
oh elder, that is incredible!
we are africa the zebra and giraffica
are you telling me that an entire village is wearing white and dunking themselves into water?
well what type of...
voodoo magic is that?
it freaks me out!
they must all be put to death!
we are the africa the one and only africa
and the life we live is primitive and proud!
we are africa we are deepest, darkest africa!
we are the fields and fertile forest, well endowed
we are africa
we are the sunrise on the savannah
a monkey with a banana
a tribal woman who doesn't wear a bra
africans are african but we are africa!
hit me!
gimme another one!
come on!
thank you.
you wanna hear something funny?
i used to think drinking coffee was wrong.
you wanna know why?
hm!
because apparently, a tribe of ancient jews lived in america, created huge civilizations and were visited by christ, but then, then disappeared, leaving no archaeological trace of themselves except... for golden plates, which were then dug up by a farmer who wrote down,
amongst other things, that hot drinks were not for the body to belly, so i can't have a cup of coffee!
elder price?
are you okay?
well well!
if it isn't the super mormon!
really changed in uganda, aren'tcha?
i'm doin' what i can.
yeah?
spreadin' the word?
makin' more brainwashed zombies?
elder price?
what happened to you?
i woke up.
that's what happened.
of course you woke up!
you drank twelve cups of coffee!
you tell me how it is, huh?
how is it you converted all those people into mormons?
i don't know.
once i baptized nagasaki the others just fell into place.
you baptized that girl?
yeah, i did.
don't hate on me, elder!
you get everything you pray for!
you're doing everything i was supposed to do!
doesn't that seem a little telling to you?
well of what?
that the universe doesn't work the way we were told!
when i was nine years old, my family took a trip.
to orlando, florida.
and it was the most... wonderful, most magical place i'd ever seen.
and i decided right then and there,
this... is where i want to spend eternity.
my parents said that if i made god proud and i did everything the church asked, in the latter days, i could have whatever
i wanted.
so i worked.
and i worked.
and even when i studied mormon stories and i thought,
that doesn't really make sense," i kept working!
because i was told that one day i would get my reward!
planet orlando!
but what do i have now?
um...
yeah...
okay, anyway, so, the uh, the mission president is coming tomorrow and, i'm without my companion and, well, it just looks kind of bad
aaaa-oh, so thaaat's why you came!
noo, i came because i care about you
bull poop!
that is bull poop, elder!
and you know it!
look, i know we may not be the best "companions,
but if we can please just act like we're still together, in front of the mission president, it would be the best thing for the both of us.
fine!
but don't talk to me!
and don't touch me!
fine!
orlando orlando
i liked you, orlando
your bright lights your big dreams
your promises you couldn't keep
orlando orlando
without you, orlando
i'm just a guy who will die and never go back... to... you...
boys!
you have all done the most amazing work on your missions.
you are the gleaming examples of latter-day saints.
praise christ.
and you two, elder price and elder cunningham, you are the most successful missionaries in all of africa.
ohh, thank you sir.
my companion has been so very helpful and there for me.
praise christ.
excuse me!
excuse me mister mormon president?
my people wish to give you a special welcome.
uhh...
neutrogena, what are you doing here?
we, we have learned so much from elder cunningham, and as our gift to you we wish to present the story of joseph smith and the first mormons.
noooooooo!
noooooooooooo!
i think this is a very bad idea.
let's not do this.
no no no, elder, this is just the sort of thing the mormon leaders need to be seeing.
yes, yes yes, let's see what these noble africans have learned.
and now we wish to honor you with the story of joseph smith, the american moses.
well, this is very good;
praise christ.
mormon
i'm going to take you back in time, to the united states, 1823.
a small and odd village called upstate new york.
there was disease and famine, but also in this village lived a simple farmer who would change everything.
his name... was joseph smith.
joseph smith, american moses
praise be to joseph, american prophet man
aye my name is joseph smith, and i am going to fuck this baby.
what!
no no joseph, don't fuck the baby joseph smith, don't fuck the baby
then god came down from heaven and appeared before joseph smith.
joseph smith, do not fuck a baby
i will get rid of your aids if you fuck this frog
joseph smith fucked the frog god gave him, and his aids went away!
then a great wizard named moroni came down from the starship enterprise.
joseph smith, your village is shit.
you shall lead the villagers to a new village.
here are the fucking directions.
away
and on the plates were written the directions to a new land.
sal tlay ka siti
joseph tried to convince all the villagers to follow him and his golden plates.
liberation, equality, no more slavery for upstate mormon people!
i got de golden plates
i'm gonna lead the people
we gotta stick together
we gotta help each other
and so we climb the mountain
and we cross the river
and we fight the oppression
by being nice to everyone
not so fast mormons, you shall not pass my mountain!
down from the mountain look who comes:
the american warlord brigham young!
yeees.
i am brigham young.
i cut off my daughter's clitoris;
that made god angry, so he turned my nose into a clit for punishment.
brigham young, his nose was a clitoris
what will you do joseph, will you fight the clitoris man?
not fight him, help him.
joseph smith took his magical fuck frog and rubbed it upon brigham young's clit face.
and behold brigham was cured!
joseph smith, magical aids frog
brigham young, frog on his clit face
brigham young was so grateful, he decided to join the mormons on their journey.
compassion, courtesy, unrelenting politeness from upstate mormon people!
i got de golden plates
i'm gonna lead the people
we gotta stick together
now comes the part of our story that gets a little bit sad.
after traveling for so long, the mormons ran out of fresh water, and become sick... with dysentery.
mormon go to the water, water go to the cup
cup go to the stomach, shit come out the butt
shit go in the water, water go in the cup
shit go down the stomach, shit come out the butt
ugh, oh fuck!
oh no, the prophet joseph smith is now getting sick!
shit go in the water, water go in the cup
cup go to the thirsty, shit go to the stomach
blood come out the butt, blood go in the water
water go in the cup, cup go to the tongue
shit blood in the stomach, shit blood in the mouth
shit blood on the insides, water come out the butt
brigham young, you take the golden plates and lead the mormons to the promised laaaand!
desperation, mortality, perseverance!
i...
got de golden plates
i'm got to lead the people
we gotta stick together...
even though their prophet had died, the mormons stuck together and helped each other, and were really nice to everyone they came across.
and then, finally, one day the mormons found
sal tlay ka siti.
and there, the mormons danced with ewoks and jesus.
welcome mormons!
now, let's all have as many babies as we can and make big mormon families!
fuck your woman, fuck your man, this is all part of god's plan
mormons fuck all that they can we're in salt lake city land
thank you, thank you, god
now we are fucking
thank you, thank you, god
god wants us fucking
thank you, thank you, god
get back to fucking
thank you, thank you, god
joseph smith, fuck frog
brigham young, clit face
shit come out the butt
jesus says:
fuck, fuck
mormons!
elders!
i'd like to have a word with you...
now!
i think they liked it.
we are sorry, mission president, we had no idea...
you keep your mouth shut!
you're in enough trouble as it is!
s-sir, um, i was... just trying to help the villagers here.
see, they all really wanted to learn.
elder!
elder, i wanted to give you this.
it's the entire play written in text.
what is going on?
what's going on here is that you have all brought ridicule down onto the latter-day saints.
but we are all latter-day saints now, right?
you and your people are about as far from being latter-day saints as it gets.
you all!
elder cunningham, tell them!
we are ready to go to sal tlay ka siti.
my things are packed.
um...
i'm so sorry, nabagamba, but um,
i never meant that you were actually going to salt lake city.
but you said that we could find paradise by listening to you.
well... when we say that, we mean paradise within yourself.
you know, it's sort of like a...
like a jesus thing.
oh...
i see.
so, when you baptized me, it meant nothing.
no, no!
it meant everything!
uncircumcised women are going to have their families killed!
where am i supposed to go?
i don't, um...
i know what you people are now.
you traveled from your sparkling lovely paradise in ootah to tell ridiculous stories to people less fortunate to make fun of them!
no no, it isn't like that...
you have crushed my soul!
i hope you all had a good laugh.
elders, you may as well pack all your things.
this district is shut down.
go home to your parents, and explain to them that you have all...
failed... as missionaries!
i really did it this time, huh?
i mean i've, i've always been a screw-up, but this?
the thing is i, i really liked her too, you know?
and in fact, maybe it was like i could almost be a normal person, with a girl who cared about me, who was... hot.
and instead i made those poor africans put on the biggest abomination in mormon history.
joseph smith dying of dysentery?
moroni from the starship enterprise?
that play was the most... beautiful thing i've ever seen.
huh?
it's like...
like you were getting a point across using modern things.
and then you tried to...
wait a minute.
you've been trying to teach me something all along, haven't you?
what?
here i thought i could just fly in here all on my own a-a-and change everything by just sticking to scripture.
while you were trying to show me that, that scripture isn't that important!
i was losing my faith, and you went out and did... something incredible!
you did something incredible
for a people who had nowhere else to go
i thought they were unreachable but then they were happy, and hopeful,
and wearing costumes.
it was almost like...
orlando...
i'm sorry that it took me so long to... realize what you were trying to teach me, elder.
oh, no that's, that's okay.
but what about nathan lane?
i mean, i made her believe in a bunch of made-up crap!
no, no, no, it doesn't matter if the stories are true or not!
that's not the point!
it doesn't matter now 'cause she's gonna get clit cut off and it's all my fault!
elder, come on!
there is always hope!
i will help you fix this!
you... would do that for me?
i'd do anything for you.
you're my best friend.
we all need a partner you're the best for me
we both need each other
we're a really awesome team
as long as we're together there's nothing we cannot do
we can make things right again, me and you
but mostly me
so, what did the mormon president think of our play?
did elder cunningham like it?
he knows we are still in previews, right?
jumamosi!
well, well.
there you are.
there have been rumors that the people of this village are uniting to oppose us.
yes.
we have been shown another way.
no.
no, we do not oppose you.
we will do whatever you say.
nabulungi, what is wrong?
our prophet has told us to stick together, to fight oppression!
forget about elder cunningham!
you aren't going to see him ever again!
what are you talking about?
why aren't we?
because elder cunningham...
he... he... he was eaten by lions, alright?
enough!
there is only one law to obey here and that is mine!
we believe in something else!
no, stop it!
all of you!
i told you our prophet is gone.
there is no promised land, and there is no salvation.
oh no!
you cannot talk like that, nabulungi.
remember the first teachings of the mormons:
when joseph smith died, they did not give up on their hope.
but it isn't true.
we aren't going to sal tlay ka siti.
nabulungi!
sal tlay ka siti isn't an actual place.
it's an idea.
a metaphor.
all the stories the prophet has told us... are just metaphors.
yeah.
you don't think a man actually fucked a frog, do you?
that's fucking stupid.
and you all believe this?
yes.
hello?
he has risen!
it is a miracle!
our prophet returns, even from the dead!
there!
you see?
he must have fucked a frog!
who?
who has risen from the dead?
he has!
so, so you might as well just, just put down your guns!
because they will not work against his... voodoo power!
and if you don't get out of this village, right now, he is going to command the angel moroni, from the death star, to unleash the kraken, which will then... which will then... which will then...
launch joseph smith's torpedoes from its mouth of christ and turn you into a lesbian!
oh!
oh nala, i am so sorry!
please, if you just give me a chance?
elder!
elder, you don't have to say anything.
i understand.
whoa, whoa, whoa, elders, where do you think you're going?
what do you mean "where are you going"?
we've been shut down.
yeah, we have to go home.
who says we have to?
what?
guys, we wanted to go on a mission so we could spend two years of our life living someplace exciting and helping people, right?
yeah.
well, so let's do it!
but the mission president said we're all about as far from latter-day saints as it gets.
naw, you know what guys?
fuck.
him.
we are still latter-day saints!
all of us!
even if we, we change some things, or we break the rules, or we have complete doubt that god exists.
it doesn't change who we are.
latter-day doesn't mean afterlife.
it means tomorrow.
i am a latter-day saint i know not what the future holds
there are sure to be times of joy and sorrow
who cares what happens when we're dead?
we shouldn't think that far ahead
the only latter day that matters is tomorrow
screw the church!
why don't we stay?
tomorrow is a latter day tomorrow is a latter day!
the skies are clearing and now the sun's coming out
it's a latter day tomorrow
put your worries and your sorrows and your cares away
tomorrow is a latter day tomorrow is a latter day
i am a latter day saint along with my whole town
in love with someone christ put my way
my family would always doubt me now nabulungi really cares about me
and together we will have a latter day
we're here for each other every step of the way
and make a latter day tomorrow
americans already found a cure for aids but they're saving it for a latter day
tomorrow is a latter day
i believe
love and joy and all the things that matter day
tomorrow is a bigger, better latter day
tomorrow, tomorrow is a latter day
a happy ending on a platter day
tomorrow is a doper, phatter latter day
the skies are clearing and now the sun's coming out
it's a latter day tomorrow
put your worries and your sorrows and your cares away
'cause tomorrow is a latter day
tomorrow is a latter day tomorrow is a latter day
so what will tomorrow bring?
what does the future hold?
i can almost see it now...
hello
my name is elder mutumbo
and i would like to share with you the most amazing book
hello
my name is sister kimbe
it's a book about a people who were poor and sad like you
a sacred text
hello
of pioneers and frogs
fuck frogs!
and how you can find salvation if you just believe
heigh ho!
ding dong hello
boba fett!
you have a lovely mud hut
and if you just put down the gun i'll show you...
oh!
ok, i'll leave!
hello
my name is elder ghali
you will love all of the happiness this book can bring
hello
hello!
my name is elder warlord
did you know that the clitoris is a holy sacred thing?
find paradise
with jesus christ
and no more war
hello
nice door!
you read that book of mormon, did you know there's more?
part four
we swear
we really care
this is not a scam
no ma'am!
have you heard the story of our prophet arnold cunningham?
hello
arnold cunningham
hello
arnold cunning...
heh-hello!
hello
our church is going strong
and if you let us in we'll show you how you can belong
join our family and set your spirit free
we can fully guarantee you that this book will change your life
hello!
this book will change your life
hello!
this book will change your life
the book of arnold
hello!
we are latter day saints we take life one day at a time
when the chips are down we know just what to say
the past may be in tatters but today is all that matters
because today is yesterday's latter day
thank you god!
ma ha nei bu, eebowai!
why are mormons happy?
it's because we know it's a latter day tomorrow
so if you're sad put your hands together and pray
that tomorrow's gonna be a latter day
yeah!
you know it's gonna be a latter day
tomorrow is a latter day!
i still have maggots in my scrotum!
__file_terminal__
2x13
night falls
are we there, yet?
all this futuristic technology, and you've never thought about bathroom?
city hall!
it must have a bathroom!
pull over... now!
bathroom?
caesar.
is it you?
esteban?
it's mayor esteban now.
mayor?
when you ran for class president, maria rodriguez got all the votes.
she was smarter and much better-looking.
and i see you're still building your crazy contraptions.
what brings you back to town?
to visit abuela.
it's a surprise.
you don't want to go there.
it is not the same as you remember.
okay, bro, let's go!
is that little raghead?
i haven't thought of that for years.
what?
nothing, son.
we'd better get going.
at least stay in town tonight.
you can head up to abuela's in the morning.
it's been over five years, esteban.
we're not waiting another minute.
if she is not really your grandmother, why are you calling her "abuela"?
there may not be a biological connection, but she practically raised the entire town.
when you were a boy, you spent every summer here.
i wish i could remember her.
or any of this.
i'm sure she'll be excited to see you.
just prepare yourself for a lot of sloppy grandma kisses.
abuela.
it's me...
caesar.
caesar?
and is that my raghead?
why is everyone calling me that?
what are you doing here?
we've come to visit.
may we come in?
no!
maybe we should've called first.
♪ so make way to start the revolution ♪
♪ make way we're gonna have fun tonight ♪
♪ make way to start the revolution ♪
♪ so make way. ♪
♪ so make way to start the revolution ♪
♪ make way to start the revolution ♪
♪ so make way. ♪
10 more minutes, six.
who wants breakfast?
yo!
abuela always was the best cook.
i have missed my children.
rex, i have been following your work with providence.
and i always knew you would be a big important scientist.
so why did you slam your door last night?
oh, that.
you just caught me off guard.
we weren't expecting visitors.
i thought you always
enough with the questions, little brother.
let me look at you.
i can't believe how you have grown.
come... see the rest of the family.
does everyone in town live here?
i remember evenings here -- laughing, telling stories.
and the food!
rex, if you thought breakfast was good, wait and see what abuela makes for dinner.
it is an old building.
there are always repairs.
uh... what's up?
it's me
federico.
have you forgotten the secret shake?
you and federico were best friends when you were little.
ragheads!
why do you keep calling me that?
you used to put underpants on your heads and act out wrestling movies.
glad i don't remember that.
lucky you.
abuela, i must speak to you.
someone has forgotten his manners.
you can't just keep avoiding me.
my phone has been ringing off the hook.
the village is concerned about the recent... activity.
well, they shouldn't be.
what goes on here is our own business.
not when it leaves these walls.
the situation is getting worse.
we have made the neccessary corrections.
it won't happen again.
you've got one last chance to get out of town.
or i will evict you myself.
an old scrubble.
you don't need to worry.
what aren't you telling us, abuela?
time to start making dinner.
dinner?
we just had breakfast.
trust me.
to family!
family!
is it like this every night?
pretty much.
hey.
you're pretty good.
ever think about going pro?
not anymore.
okay, maybe not my best move.
but it wasn't that bad.
come, children!
you'll sleep here.
see you in the morning.
did she just lock us in?
she locked us in!
we need to respect our elders.
i'm sure she hat her reasons.
ooh!
bed's pretty comfy.
good night.
but -- but...
it's only 6:30!
sure.
that's not weird, either.
good.
i'm glad you could return my call.
i understand you can help me with my evo problem.
federico?
that's his room behind here!
can you break it down?
what about respecting my elders?
technically, i am your elder.
break it down!
i'll do one better.
hunh!
this place is just full of surprises.
okay, fur face, if you ate my friend...
rex, wait!
there has been a breach!
where is rex?
i suspect halfway down the hill by now.
abuela...
i know.
that is for federico!
rex!
no!
that is federico!
are those your hands?
genial.
i got out again, didn't i?
so, you're like a were-evo?
light-wolf mutant.
interesting.
come -- we've got to get back to the house.
i told you this would happen.
you can't control them anymore.
uh, it wasn't her -- it was me.
i let him out.
i didn't know.
all these evos!
they're just boys.
look at the destruction your "boys" caused.
the people are tired of living in fear.
you'll be leaving today.
i am sorry abuela.
i had no idea.
and now you have to leave because of me.
i'm not going anywhere!
we turn at sundown and then back at sunrise.
it only happens to some of us.
i took samples from all of the affected family members.
everyone shares the same genetic code -- something similar to hypertrichosis.
hyper... what?
werewolf syndrome.
the nanites triggered the dormant gene.
can you cure it?
i can try.
strange.
i don't feel anything.
do you?
thanks anyway.
i'm seeing no active nanite traces whatsoever.
well, maybe it's because he's not in evo form.
i just want a normal life again.
i don't want to have to leave my home.
maybe there's a way you can have both.
sorry about the wall.
why didn't you tell us?
because i didn't want providence to know.
but providence can help.
by taking those afflicted away?
no.
every night, when the bell tolls, those that have the change are locked away safely.
for years, it has been this way, and no one has been hurt.
but you're prisoners in your own home!
you may see it that way, child, but at least we are a family.
you know, if i was busted today, it was kind of fun to get out.
don't you ever feel cooped up in here?
there is one thing i miss.
goal!
why did you stop playing if you loved it so much?
one day during practice, i stayed late so some scouts could see me play.
sun went down, and, well... they made me quit the league after that.
still haven't replaced the goal box.
is that providence?
i don't know who it is.
we should probably get back.
it's almost evening bell.
rex!
that guy just shot my ball!
oh, this is just perfect.
hunter cain.
he has a thing for hunting down evos.
i already put him away once.
so what's he doing here?
guessing your mayor called him.
no, i mean, did he break out or something?
don't know.
don't care.
why am i not surprised?
this one of them?
bringing this guy here was a bad move.
for them.
and i get to settle an old score while i'm at it.
lucky me.
no -- lucky me!
rex, you gotta go.
you don't have to worry.
this guy is nothing to sweat.
no!
well, what do we have here?
esteban, my friend, i may not even charge you for this one.
the mayer was not kidding.
he sent an evo hunter who likes to shoot first and skip the questions.
we'll need every man, woman, and werewolf.
you were warned abuela.
you can leave peacefully, or we will bring you out.
i didn't come here for conversation.
but you said it would just be a show of force.
we run them out of town -- no one gets hurt.
i don't negotiate with evos or their families.
if you don't like what you're about to see, you can head on down the hill.
why don't you join them, hunter?
i never back down from a fight.
neither do i.
you bring you magic evil bullets or is this going to be a real fight?
lucky for you, these are the old-fashioned kind.
but they hurt just as bad.
yeah, that is kind fo annoying.
just hours ago, there wasn't any nanite activity.
but now it's like night and day.
that was my little pun.
it seems the samples are reacting differently in the absence of sunlight.
if i can only work out the photo-reactive elements...
i don't even think a cure will stop hunter cain.
he'll never listen to reason.
i still got to try.
i think i can effect a change in the nanite programming during the nocturnal cycle.
if i'm gonna cure this, i have to do it before sunrise.
not if hunter gets to them first.
i can keep doing this till you run out of ammo.
fire on target!
note to self -- don't give him any ideas.
you have to lock them out.
i made a promise to keep them safe from harm!
where they can't defend themselves?
that's exactly what won't happen!
grandma, step aside.
i stand with my family.
have it your way.
i'll take all of you down.
you obviously haven't met my family.
can't believe we're not related.
so what was your big jail brake?
nail file in a cake?
exploding smoke bomb?
cold, hard cash.
not everyone at providence is an evo-lover.
yes!
we can reprogram the nanites to disregard the photo-reactive coding of their dna with a frequency-tuned pulse!
that should allow you to cure them!
sounds great, but i've sort of got my hands full.
you mess with my brother...
you mess with me.
who are you?
you an evo?
no.
i'm a scientist.
your turn.
wait!
i thought you said you had to zap their nanites.
in a manner of speaking.
first, i zap you.
then, you have your nanites do the rest.
too strong.
i'll make an adjustment.
adjustment?
how about you wait for me to say "okay" next time?
you're still here?
when i said i was out of the disintegrator ammo, i lied.
one left, and it has your name on it.
federico, i'm not sure if you can understand me, but it might be time for the return of ragheads.
i think i have got the setting figured out.
you think?
that's more like it.
okay.
let's give it a try.
i'm not trying to hurt you.
federico, my heart.
let him try.
maybe we have to wait for sunrise.
we... we made it worse.
now he's stuck that way!
it isn't him... it's me.
i can control it now!
doesn't change a thing to me.
he's still an evo.
i'm gonna finish the job i came here to do.
i'll wipe out the whole compound if i have to.
there is no place for your kind of hatred here.
hunter:
you think i'm afraid of you?
i think you should be.
hunter knows i hold a grudge.
he'll come back.
and we'll be waiting.
so, this mean you're gonna try out for the pros?
i think it's time we all go out and live our lives.
family!
ragheads!
__file_terminal__
announcer:
enteringthefinal
phase of victory over hitler's
nazis, yank armies swarm across
western germany, bringing
devastation to cities of the reich.
from all sides, allied might
crushes in on the remains of the
wehrmacht, bringing home the
horrors of war to the german
people as they have never
experienced it before.
narrator:
thiswasthe alliedvictory.
but if you were german...
it was your defeat.
woman:
andnowwearehated .
objects of contempt.
we are poor, downtrodden, and
despised by all.
narrator:
thegermanpeople
had known for some time that
they would lose the war,
and that they would soon be
called to account for what had
been done in their names.
woman:" myfingersareshaking
as i write this.
everyone is now turning their
backs on adolf.
no one was ever a supporter.
everyone was persecuted and no
one denounced anyone else.
what about me?
i was there.
i breathed what was in the air.
it affected all of us.
narrator:
thisis notthe story
of how adolf hitler
seized power in germany.
this is the story of how and why
the german people gave it to him.
woman:" it'seasyto throwstones.
easy to sit in judgment when
you are in the midst of abundance,
roast chicken, and
the good life.
'we'd do differently,' people say.
'we would long since have shaken off
the dictatorship of nazi terror.'
would they really have?
narrator:
someof whatyou will
see has never been shown on
american television before,
and some of it cannot be shown
in germany, even today.
these are their words,
their films.
this is the rise of the third reich.
there had once been another war,
and another german defeat.
haffner:
theendofthewar
meant husbands restored to wives,
and life restored to men,
but there was no sense of joy,
only defeat, anxiety,
senseless gunfights, confusion.
narrator:
ifyouweregerman
in 1919, your peace was
humiliation and suffering.
enforced democracy had
resulted in chaos.
money was worthless.
vigilantes ruled the streets.
berlin had become a swamp of
depravity, everything and everyone
was for sale.
haffner:
theatmosphere
has become revolutionary...
apocalyptic.
not only money, but all
standards have lost their value.
saviors have appeared
everywhere, declaring that
they've been sent by god
to save the world.
narrator:
mystics,magicians,
and religious fanatics drew
followers desperate for rescue.
each was called a heiland
or savior, but in german, there is
no plural word for "savior.
there can be only one.
fromm:
inmunich,thereisa
corporal who has been
causing trouble.
they say he has an almost
hypnotic power.
narrator:
itwasthe 2nd ofseptember,1923.
here, at this nationalist rally,
adolf hitler made one of his
first appearances on film.
man:
theysayheputs up
signs at his meetings saying
no entry for jews," but he has
the most persuasive line about
german honor and rights for the
workers and a new society.
and whether you like him or not,
he certainly knows what he wants.
narrator:
twomonthsafter
this film was shot, he would
attempt to take over germany
and fail.
overnight, hitler became a
national figure, to some,
magnetic, to others, absurd.
haffner:
themunichsavior
filled the headlines with a
ridiculous attempt to stage a
revolution in a beer cellar.
in fact, the revolutionaries
had been dispersed by police fire
as they left the cellar,
and that was the end of the matter.
narrator:
butit wasn't.
the swastika, or hakenkreuz flag
carried that day by
hitler's national socialist party
was stained with the
blood of the fallen.
from this point forward,
hitler would call it "the flag of martyrs
and use it to inspire
a growing following
of true believers...
nazis.
man:
i feelelectrified.
a man by the name of adolf hitler
has tried to restore
honor to the german people.
i feel with an increasing
certainty that a man has arisen
to lead the fatherland towards
a brighter future.
narrator:
herein buckeberg,
in north central germany,
film hobbyist adolf von hinuber
shot this film with his 9.5mm camera.
200 miles away, in berlin,
communists were filming these
violent clashes with police.
but if you were a loyal follower
of adolf hitler, you would have
been here.
it was august 2, 1929, and the
national socialists were filming
their third party rally,
the first here in nuremberg.
100,000 nazis attended.
buchner:
suddenly,
adolf hitler appears.
he goes to each man,
shaking his hand.
the are things one cannot
explain, cannot describe.
i never stop thinking of him.
sometimes he meets us
in our dreams.
narrator:
inthisfootage,
hitler consecrates nazi party
flags by touching them to the
blutfahne--the blood-stained
swastika of his failed revolution.
the loyalists were dazzled.
buchner:
peoplecallhim
a fool and a dreamer, and much more.
but what you say is true, adolf hitler.
it is critical to our nation's
history that we introduce over 65 million people to the ideas
of national socialism.
65 million national socialists,
wonderful, fantastic, this goal!
narrator:
mostgermansstill
thought of hitler as too radical.
if...
they thought of him at all.
but in less than three months,
wall street would crash...
and take the german economy
down with it.
and within a year, the nazis
would be one of the largest
political parties in germany.
bangert:
whilewe descended
into misery and called
anxiously for a savior,
he emerged like a mountain.
columns march...
drums beat...
and 100,000 men stand
firmly gathered around one man.
now build up your people, oh master,
a new, great fatherland awaits.
narrator:
itwas1932.
this footage was recorded at a
carnival near leipzig, germany.
filmmaker walter lenger brought
his 16mm camera and the
girl he would marry.
the atmosphere was joyful...
but beyond these carnival gates...
there were calls for revolution.
if you were german,
and you wanted change,
you had two choices:
either you joined the growing
numbers of communists, or,
like walter lenger,
you joined the nazi party.
the great depression was in its
third year...
and germany had suffered as much
as any country.
woman:" germanmother,your
childrens' father and provider
stands before the closed-down
factories, unemployed, without
bread, without the hope that his
lot in life will change.
german mother, you want a good
future and freedom for your
children.
this is why you will vote on the 13th of march for adolf hitler.
narrator:
onfilm,walter
lenger documented hitler's first
and only bid for elected
office--the german presidency.
if you opposed the nazis, you
were sure that this was the end
of hitler.
haffner:
hitlerhimselfis
still rather a handicap for the
movement that has gathered
around him.
besides, for ordinary germans,
his personal appearance is
thoroughly repellent
the epileptic behavior, the wild
gesticulations and foaming at
the mouth, the alternately
shifty and staring eyes.
most of those who have begun to
acclaim hitler would probably
avoid asking him for a light if
they met him in the street.
narrator:
butin lessthana
year, hitler would be
chancellor.
it was the 10th of february, 1933.
although they had never captured
more than 37% of the popular
vote, the nazis were the
largest political party in
germany.
and so german leaders installed
hitler as chancellor.
as many as 20 million people
across germany were tuned in to
this radio broadcast...
hitler's largest audience ever.
after this speech, nazi party
offices were flooded with so
many membership requests they
had to suspend admissions.
even so, hitler did not yet
control germany.
in two weeks, that would change.
narrator:
itwasthe morning
of february 28, 1933.
if you lived in berlin...
you awoke to this:
during the night someone had set
fire to germany's parliament.
ebermayer:
justnow,the
revolution has begun in earnest.
the middle class had been
repelled by the roughness and
lack of polish by the nazis.
now they've been frightened and
won over by the reichstag fire.
narrator:
tothisday ,noone
is certain who set the fire that
destroyed the reichstag.
but hitler knew who he would
blame--his rivals,
the communists.
the nazi press said that the
reichstag fire was intended as a
signal for communist cells
across germany to rise up and
revolt.
solmitz:
theywantedtosend
armed mobs into villages to
commit murder and plunder.
hostages would be taken from the
middle class.
wives and children of police
officers used as human shields.
the destruction of all cultural
values--just like in russia.
narrator:
hitlerhadinvented
a communist threat.
now he would use it to crush his
opposition.
haffner:
themorningafter
the fire, i discussed these
matters with a few friends.
all of them are very interested
in the question of who really
started the fire, and more than
one of them hinted that they had
doubts about the official story.
but none of them were bothered
that from now on their
telephones would be tapped,
their letters opened, and their
desks broken into.
narrator:
radicalandviolent
changes were happening across
germany, but hitler had
justified them all.
gebensleben:
thisruthless
intervention by the government
may appear strange,
but we must clean up.
the communists have to disappear.
klemperer:
dayafterday
flags raised,
buildings taken over,
people shot,
newspapers banned.
it is shocking how naked acts of
violence, breaches of the law,
barbaric opinions;
appear quite
undisguised as official decree.
actually, it's terribly risky
even to be writing this.
narrator:
itwasthe 23rdof
march.
the communists were in jail.
there was no one left to stop
the new nazi majority in
germany's parliament.
when delegates voted to
consolidate all power
in adolf hitler.
he had been chancellor for
exactly... 52 days.
now for all intents and
purposes, he was dictator.
woman:
wecrywithhappiness
and joy.
all traces of resistance have
been eliminated.
enthusiasm grips the entire
nation.
we can barely believe that our
beloved fuhrer stands alone at
the helm of the reich.
haffner:
churchbellsring,
children wave flags.
there are daily parades.
the people have become used to
cheering...
even when there's no reason for it.
it is reason enough that people
who distance themselves from the
nazis are tortured to death
daily with steel whips and
electric drills.
better to celebrate.
howl with the wolves.
heil.
narrator:
itwasthe 28thofmarch , 1933.
adolf hitler had been dictator
of germany for five days.
even so, unless you
openly opposed the nazis,
your life went on as before.
but for some, that was about
to change.
ebermayer:
wearehavinglunch
with a law professor and his wife.
they are both jewish.
the amazing thing is that this
clever, charming woman is not at
all opposed to the nazis.
on the contrary, she lectures us
on the outstanding qualities of
adolf hitler...
on the greatness of the age
which we are allowed to witness,
on the national rebirth,
and she is firmly convinced
that no harm whatsoever
will come to educated jews in germany.
narrator:
fourdaysafter
this lunch, nazi party member
walter lenger used his camera to
document another historic moment
in the new third reich.
the nazis were boycotting all
jewish businesses in germany.
fewer than 1 in 100 germans
were jewish.
most saw themselves as germans first.
even so, hitler said the jews
were germany's misfortune.
haffner:
suddenly,everyone
feels justified or required to
have an opinion about the jews.
and to state it publicly.
distinctions are made between
decent jews and others.
woman:
i sympathize
with the jews.
however, i would support their
conversion to christianity with
all honesty.
landau:
whydo theystilllie,
when they already have the
power to do what they like?
i want to know that.
why don't they just kill us,
if that's what they want?
this footage was shot at the
oranienburg concentration camp
outside berlin in the spring of 1933.
it shows an orderly camp where
prisoners are treated humanely.
but if you were there, you would
have experienced something much
different.
man:
nooneeverknowswhen
it will be his turn to be beaten,
or for what he must be beaten.
those who are beaten up in the
camp usually do not say a word
because they dare not, but at
night you could hear the groans
and sobbing.
klemperer:
a friendtells
this story:
a man's garden was dug up.
there was supposed to be a
machine gun in it,
but nothing was found.
to squeeze a confession,
they beat him.
his corpse was brought back to
the hospital.
his body had boot marks on the
stomach, and fist-sized holes in
the back.
the official cause of death?
dysentery.
narrator:
themessagewas clear.
opposition of any kind
would not be tolerated.
the third reich had begun its rise.
narrator:
itwasjanuary1,1934,
and the nazis were
ringing in the new year.
goebbels:
a yearof success
is behind us.
people, state and nation
have become one...
and the strong will
of the fuhrer is over us all.
germany stands before the world
as an unshakable unity.
narrator:
butnoteveryonewaswelcome
in the new regime.
only those citizens the nazis
believed were racially superior.
and this year, they would begin
to engineer more of them.
in 1934, nazi party member
kurt hartmann and his wife lotte
welcomed this new baby boy.
ulrich hartmann was lucky that
his parents did not suffer from
undesirable genetic traits.
because this year, the nazis
would begin surgically
preventing those germans
from breeding.
the nazis made propaganda films
like these
to encourage compliance with the new law.
but you could be forcibly sterilized
for anything they considered
a genetic flaw.
emma:
i havebeeninformed
by writing, that i am to be
rendered infertile.
i reject this decision.
i cannot understand
why they want to sterilize me
since i've done nothing wrong.
anyone could've suffered from
a nervous breakdown.
narrator:
emmawassterilizedanyway.
man:
i havenoticedinthese
triumphant nazi celebrations
a new feature
i never used to see.
behind the band and its
following of brown-shirted
storm troops
there is now a long tail
of civilian flag wavers
who never used to march with them.
narrator:
itwasthe 25thoffebruary.
these nazi loyalists were assembled
in munich for what was
billed as the biggest oath taking
in human history.
if you knew what was
good for you, you joined him.
in 1934, kurt and lotte hartmann's
oldest son, peter, began school.
like other german boys,
on his his first day he learned
the mandatory german greeting
heil hitler.
if you were an adult and you didn't
use the hitler greeting,
you risked being sent to a
concentration camp.
so now, in public at least,
it seemed as if everyone
was a nazi.
ebermayer:
everyone,
literally everyone, cringes
with fear.
no letter, no telephone conversation,
no word on the street
is safe anymore.
everyone fears the next person
may be an informer.
narrator:
summer1934.
nazi party member adolf von hinuber
filmed this footage
here, on the island of borkum,
in the north sea.
he and his friends were welcome
at this popular vacation spot.
jews were not.
for decades, the residents of
borkum proudly claimed to be
free of jews.
and this year, the nazis would
set that goal
for all of germany.
if you were a devoted nazi party member,
the summer ended as they all did,
with the annual
pilgrimage to nuremberg for the
party rally.
for the faithful, this was the
most highly anticipated event
on the nazi calendar.
but the rally of 1934
would be particularly special...
because this year, they would
film the most influential piece
of nazi propaganda ever made.
riefenstahl:
whatiwitnessed
in nuremberg is one of the most
remarkable events
i have ever experienced.
i cannot compare it
to anything i've ever
experienced before as an artist.
narrator:
tocapture
the glory of the third reich,
filmmaker leni riefenstahl
helped to stage it,
directing and rehearsing this scene
at least 50 times.
the film "triumph of the will
premiered to worldwide acclaim,
winning awards in germany,
venice, and finally, paris.
within a year of that award,
adolf hitler was named time magazine's
man of the year.
mana teacherin dornberghad
the children recite
manandchild:"jewsare
sinners.
they slaughter christian
children.
they cut their throats,
the damned jewish filth.
man:
theteacherthreatened
to punish the children if they
would not learn the poem by heart
by the following day.
narrator:
itwasseptember15,1935,
and once again, the nazi faithful
were gathering in nuremberg.
in a speech that was broadcast
to the nation, hitler addressed
what he called
the jewish problem.
ebermayer:
afterthesethree
laws were read...
the halls rang with
minute-long applause.
it was the call of a wild animal,
a beast that smells blood.
announcer:
welcometo berlin,
capital of the german reich!
narrator:
itwasthe summer
of 1936, and the world was
coming to berlin.
announcer:
forberlin,1936
is the olympic year, and
therefore berlin is presenting
herself in festival dress.
the main theme are the flags of
the new party's designs, the
black swastikas in a white circle
on a red background.
narrator:
germany'scapital
was hosting the 11th olympic games,
and the third reich
produced tourism films like this:
to encourage foreigners to visit.
hitler wanted the world to see
the nazi renaissance for itself.
and so, for two weeks in august,
the nazis put on a show.
if you were a foreign tourist at
the olympics, the nazis might
have convinced you that germany
was an open and tolerant nation.
for the first time in three years,
foreign newspapers
were available for purchase.
the signs prohibiting jews from
public parks or benches had been
taken down.
if you were german, you knew
this was not nazi germany.
klemperer:
i findtheolympics
so odious.
it's constantly being drummed
into the foreigners that here,
one is witnessing the revival,
the flowering, the unity of
spirit of the third reich,
which lovingly embraces the whole world.
narrator:
outsidethestadiumgates,
berlin's hotel and restaurant workers
had been instructed
to treat foreigners
with extreme tolerance.
many american athletes commented
that they had never been so well treated
at home.
foreigners who know germany only
from what they have seen here
can carry home just one
impression:
it is that this is a nation
happy and prosperous beyond
belief, that hitler is one of
the greatest, if not the
greatest, political leaders in
the world today...
and that germans are a peaceful people
who deserve the best the
world can give them.
when the games ended,
the tourists went home.
berlin returned to normal.
and lotte and kurt hartmann
returned to brunswick, where
they screened their olympic home
movies for sons ulrich and peter.
peter hartmann was proud to be
a german boy...
and so he joined the hitler youth.
by 1936, all children over 10
were required to join, whether
they were willing or not.
the many thousands of new
members were to be presented to
hitler as a gift for his 48th birthday.
if you were a 10-year-old boy
in germany, you too might have
wanted to join after watching
films like this.
hermand:
forourfieldexercises,
our squad has to find
the other squad through military
reconnaissance.
once the "enemy" squad is
found...
there are fistfights.
this exercise is supposed to
teach us that comradeship,
as they call it, is formed in battle.
man:
wearedreadfullyworried.
the boys won't listen to us anymore.
when my wife insisted that our
oldest obey...
he drew his dagger and assaulted her.
he shouted, "i belong to the
fuhrer first!
the family comes second.
narrator:
withintwoyears,
nearly eight million children
had taken the hitler youth oath
of allegiance
narratorandboy:
iswearto
devote myself to adolph hitler.
i am willing and ready to give up
my life, so help me god.
narrator:
intheend ,manyof
them would.
narrator:
itwas1937
and amateur filmmaker walter lenger
celebrated his wedding
by making this short film.
lenger and his bride were
exactly the kind of germans
hitler wanted more of
industrious, politically enthusiastic,
and most importantly...
aryan.
women like mrs. lenger were
encouraged by the reich to have
as many children as possible.
because, if the third reich
was going to achieve its goals,
it didn't just need better germans.
it needed more of them.
woman:
intheeyesofourbelovedleader,
the mother is the most important person
in the nation.
we are germany's hope in the future,
and it is our duty to
breed and rear the new
generation of sons and daughters.
narrator:
thisfemaledivision
of the hitler youth was
filmed hiking outside munich in 1937.
participation was mandatory for
these girls, who were required
to document that they were aryan
and free of hereditary disease.
girl:
dearmotherand father,
in our camp there are 48 girls.
near us is a boys' camp.
we see the boys very often
and mend their clothing as we spend
the evenings with them.
a funny thing--of these 48 girls, 35 are pregnant,
and still funnier, i'm one of the 35!
pope:
uponlearningofher
daughter's pregnancy,
one girl's horrified mother
rushed to the camp to investigate
and discipline her daughter.
the 16-year old replied hotly
that if her mother did not
go home and leave her alone,
she would report her to the
camp leader, who would in turn
report the mother to the gestapo,
who would then take action against her
for sabotaging german motherhood.
announcer:
here'sabulletinfrom vienna.
chancellor hitler termed austria,
the latest and greatest addition
to the german reich.
a hysterical roar of cheers today in vienna.
the crowd was described as
one of the greatest gatherings ever assembled
in the austrian capital.
meanwhile, an unidentified man
fired at nazi storm troopers
from a window and then shot
himself dead.
later at a downtown cafe,
a man got up from a table,
shouted "heil hitler
and then stabbed himself.
narrator:
itwasthe 12thofmarch ,
and hitler was taking austria.
the treaty that had ended world war i
forbade the union
of germany and austria.
but the majority
of austrians wanted it.
as one foreign newspaper
observed, "if hitler was raping austria,
then the austrians liked getting raped.
overnight, the german empire
had grown by five million citizens.
within days, 70,000 austrians
would be sent to concentration camps.
girl:
nazisongsand
nazi salutes everywhere.
the city is a sea of swastika flags.
when did they manage to sew
all these huge swastika flags?
when did all our nice neighbors
obtain their swastika insignia?
what happened?
reck-hallectewen:
asiwrite,
an immense flight of bombers
is droning past overhead...
as though these planes were
flying against a world power.
you, up there, i hate you.
i do not know if i will
survive your downfall,
but this i do know...
this is a caricature of germany...
smeared by a malignant ape,
escaped from a leash.
narrator:
itwasthe summerof1938.
and celebration was in the air.
here in munich, the third reich
was preparing to celebrate the
nazification of german culture.
200 miles north, in leipzig,
walter lenger and his wife
were celebrating their birthdays.
he turned 40...
and she, 30.
and in the nation's capital of berlin,
jewish journalist, bella fromm,
was also celebrating.
fromm:
whenifoundmyself
outside the american consulate,
the american visa in my hand,
i had to sit down on the stone steps
and cry in my grateful happiness.
i'm going as soon as i can.
i must manage to get out of germany
before it is too late.
narrator:
itwasthe 9th ofjuly ,1938 .
by special will of the fuhrer,
the city of munich was hosting a 72-hour festival dedicated
to german art.
if you were one of the many
thousands of visitors,
you would have seen the ideal germany
rendered in paintings,
sculptures and etchings,
all hand-selected by hitler himself.
pope:
i wasconductedthrough
the house of german art.
i could hardly believe my eyes.
the trend is eroticism:
to give german men the incentive
to have many german children...
and the glory of the german farmer
who feeds the nation's warriors;
and, of course,
heroism in battle.
concluding the 3-day art orgy is
a 6-mile long procession
celebrating 2,000 years of german culture
with floats drawn by army horses
and thousands of men
and women in costume.
it goes on for three solid hours.
at the end, the symbol of
the third reich:
the sovereign german eagle.
but the climax,
which brings the german spectators
to their feet,
is the goose-stepping soldiers.
it is an admission of the
fuhrer's restless plans...
for world conquest.
narrator:
inlessthan12weeks ,
hitler will move to invade
neighboring czechoslovakia.
announcer:
germany is one of the most
popular tourist countries in the world.
the new national travel offices
relieve the tourist of the usual
travel worries.
narrator:
butif youwereagermanjew,
like bella fromm,
moving around germany was difficult...
and getting out usually meant
giving up everything you had.
fromm:
i didnotsparemoney
on my travel,
because i'd have to leave it
in germany anyway.
to get out, i had to pay next
year's taxes in advance,
even though i will not be in germany
at all.
but no price is too much.
this is a country to get out of...
even if you have to do it naked.
narrator:
itwasthe 26thofseptember,
and the annual oktoberfest
in munich was in full swing.
but in a few minutes,
hitler himself
would put an end to the festivities.
pope:
suddenly,
the roller coasters stop.
on the loudspeakers, the fuhrer
is raging against czechoslovakia.
never have i seen such a large
crowd change from elation to gloom
so instantaneously.
narrator:
hitlerhaddemanded
that czechoslovakia cede a large
portion of its german-speaking
territory to the third reich.
if czechoslovakia refused,
germany vowed to invade.
24 hours later, the evening of
september 27th...
here in berlin, german soldiers
prepared for an invasion.
in only a few hours, they would
roll to the czechoslovakian border.
andreas-friedrich:
havethepeople
any idea what they are
being forced into?
no, i don't want any part of it.
we want peace.
and tomorrow, there will be war.
fromm:
safeaboardthis
gorgeous boat.
it is almost too much for me to believe.
then, when i do become acutely
aware of my good fortune,
i almost feel guilty, remembering
the unfortunate ones who wait,
desperately hoping for their
chance to get out.
narrator:
ontheday bellafromm
sailed for america,
this baby girl was born in the town
of halberstadt, outside berlin.
wibke klamroth's mother and father
are enthusiastic nazis,
but it is only september of 1938.
the third reich will last for
another seven years.
and in those seven years,
hitler will betray...
impoverish...
and ultimately destroy
the klamroth family...
along with the rest of germany.
__file_terminal__
operation elect fitz is 24 hours old and i'm not even on the ballot.
you need to tell larry that i'm your campaign manager!
i think we can all agree that i am most qualified for the job.
you're not in the computer.
according to this, you don't even exist.
i merely suggested to some people i know at city hall that if fitz was somehow accidentally deleted from the system, maybe they'd get a little raise.
you stole that wurlitzer from my shop!
i want it back!
if you guys had any real claim to some jukebox you think i have, you'd have called the cops by now.
who needs the cops?
i got the gay mafia.
what the fuck are you doing here anyway?
i need my birth certificate - and not the fake one!
i want out of miami with my wurlitzer!
brotherfuckers!
richard fitzpatrick makes good on a promise - any promise
i have to come down here and see it for myself.
blah blah, unrequited, blah blah, sign!
well, congratulations.
no thanks to you.
prove it.
maybe later.
right now i've got an election to win.
what is the present if you ignore the past?
i'll tell you what it is.
a fuck of a lot more fun.
remember that famous story of the guy who had a blast following tradition and doing what he was told every day of his kick-ass life?
the repairs are complete.
your humble chariot awaits.
if you'd please...
of course you don't.
because that guy doesn't exist.
tradition's for jerk offs.
brown nosers who let dead people tell them how to run their shit.
salam aleikum!
your sayara is ready.
it's good, right?
atta boy.
three more to go.
is that?
the local imam?
you bet your ass it is.
and i just sold him this suv.
what?
gotta celebrate with a new customers.
it's tradition.
we need more signs.
we can't afford more signs.
signage is so two thousand and ten.
the future?
it's in t-shirts.
huh?
it's like a sign...
you can wear.
want one?
i got a thousand.
tell me you paid for them yourself.
no, fitzy covered it.
could have.
things got kind of hazy after that second eight ball.
it was a victory party.
you haven't won anything yet!
and you can't if your campaign chest is empty.
hey, one man calls the shots around here.
and his name rhymes with tits.
fitz!
you're my campaign manager.
manage to get me some bread.
fear not.
as co-manager
ha!
co-manager?
more like assistant tampon.
mean.
and i have a solution.
with my research - that dot didn't do
i found out that over half of the city councillors are members of glenn downs country club.
they control local politics.
if we get them on side we'll win.
i hate to rain on larry's pride parade but the glen downs?
you?
you think i can't hobnob old money?
how should i put this?
you're cotton blend, they're vicuña.
screw you.
and whatever vicuña is.
i agree.
with less strong language.
and vicuña is rare, luxury wool.
huh.
i'll have them eating out of my palm by sundown.
bullshit.
you don't have a virgin corn hole's chance in a fag bar.
it's on his tab.
fuck that and fuck you.
i could charm the shit out of those country club pricks.
prick charmer, huh?
go ahead.
tickle their balls with your chin.
gotta make some sacrifices if you're getting into politics, right?
you hear that, old man?
it's the end.
and it's coming.
nothing left for you to do but try to find your glory days in the bottom of a bottle.
you think you're the only one with plans, kid?
only thing you ever had was your dealership.
and now you got shit.
i'm gonna get it back.
how you gonna do that?
'nother round for the has been.
making big plans is thirsty work.
i'll say hi to the country club for you.
you do that.
you tell 'em ken fitzpatrick sends his fondest regards.
if you insist on doing this, you're going to need some of my beauty queen etiquette to spit and polish your rough edges.
sounds like a blowjob.
thank you for proving my point.
the country club's bylaws clearly state a strict dress code.
and i don't think we should have jumped the fence to get in.
quit being such a little bitch, larry.
yeah, larry.
we must respect their traditions in order to earn their acceptance.
they're not indians, ass-magnet.
i gotta take a leak.
no, no!
hey, freedom 55.
in case you hadn't noticed, this bush is occupied.
in case you hadn't noticed, you're urinating on my ball.
play through.
wandering around like this is a common park.
why the city won't let us electrify the fence is beyond me.
cripes, fitz.
just introduce yourself, pretend you met somewhere.
you seriously coaching me on a sales job, red?
all right, let's skip the ass sniffing and cut to the chase, okay?
i'm the guy who's going to let you electrify this fence to stop scumbags like me from pissing all over your back nine.
coverton's next councilman, richard fitzpatrick.
fitzpatrick?
so you're the young turk who's shaking up the municipal election.
so, you've heard of me.
in passing.
i can't endorse anyone who isn't a member of the club.
he'd be happy to join.
honour to meet you, sir.
larry.
more important than her.
membership is closed.
but i like the cut of your jib, fitzpatrick.
i might be able to get the club to open its books.
it won't be easy.
to become part of glen downs is to become part of history.
richard will do anything.
well, richard...
let's discuss it over a round of golf.
sure...
isn't there a rule that no unmarried women are allowed on the course?
uh huh...
that's sexist.
cousin, how many times must i remind you to shut the door?
were you born in a barn?
like you, i was born in a tent.
and this door has been forced open.
thievery!
cousin, phone the police.
this is my shit!
you sold it to us.
i sold you this joint, not my lucky stapler.
the fuck have you done to the place?
looks like the goddamned temple of doom in there.
your office is now our prayer room.
you sick fucks.
no, you are the fuck of sickness!
qur'an this, assholes.
okay...
that is a phone book.
good luck calling people.
please leave or we will have you removed.
you and whose army?
this ain't over, camel dusters!
i'm gonna tear your shit show apart!
it's like a tablecloth date-raped a kilt.
it's not so bad.
so what's your pleasure?
best ball?
skins?
stroke play?
my kinda club.
those are golf terms, not coitus.
you do play?
yeah.
sure.
i've been hitting the skins since i was a kid.
fine.
how 'bout a small wager?
say ten a hole?
never say no to easy money.
good.
ten thousand it is.
no no no no!
man up, larry.
i got it...
richard...
okay, i got this.
richard!
hey, wait up!
wait!
richard!
i got this!
yeah, you try and beat my high score, asshole!
watch me!
i had it all, kid.
money.
women.
power.
i was a king.
yeah, and you traded it all for a shiny f.
been there, man.
don't touch me, hippy.
i got no time for your kumbaya bullshit.
sorry, mr. f.
hey is that a coincidence or what?
ken fitzpatrick, idiot.
whoa.
triple coincidence.
my life's been in the shitter since i sold out to those chinks.
no shit, dude.
you had a rat tail.
fuck off and help.
i got to sell a lotta fucking cars before i kick the bucket.
i gotta get those fucks off my lot.
yeah.
go dig up some terrorist shit.
or plant some.
oh...
yeah.
watch and learn.
fuck!
fuck.
richard!
while i support you exercising,
i feel it prudent to point out that we currently owe sixty thousand dollars.
we need a way out.
break my arm.
i don't owe anything unless i finish the game.
richard, i could never- do it!
i'd break both your legs for a nickel.
come on!
do it!
really?
had enough?
just getting started.
i'm only going to end this farce because you're ruining a perfectly good bunker.
you never had a chance.
fitzpatricks have been banned since your father sold me a lemon of a cadillac in '92.
you and your kind - keep climbing.
you weasely fuck.
what about the campaign endorsement?
if i were you, i'd worry more about the sixty thousand you owe me.
well, that's not fair.
fuck them.
and fuck my old man for fucking them first.
rich poncy pricks.
you are rich in richard and that's all that matters.
jesus, ass-buffet, give it a rest, will ya.
what mattered was getting their support, remember?
you should.
it was your idea in the first place.
didn't know it was ladies night.
you knew i didn't stand a chance and you let me walk right into that snake pit.
fucking van bulow.
there was nothing wrong with that cadillac.
serves you right for trying to suck up.
you can still win them over, richard.
screw you for making me listen to your stupid ideas, and screw you for making me pick up the tab for your mistakes.
what are you doing?
what i should have done in the first place.
i'm doing it my way.
fitz!
fitz
what the hell happened?
wait.
let's make this easier - what didn't happen?
uh, it was gin.
lots of gin.
and then everything goes kind of foggy.
you seen my car keys?
uh, no...
ring-a-ding-ding, fitzy.
richard!
for the love of all that is holy.
what have you done?
that sure helped, larry.
figures he's too much of a pussy to keep tabs on you like i asked.
sounds like he got an ass-full too.
where is he?
don't know.
don't care.
where do you think you're going?
the clubhouse.
hair of the dog.
more alcohol.
that's exactly what you need.
i just want to make sure
i gave those rich pricks a piece of my mind.
so reginald van bulow will torddo your chances in politics?
you need to apologize for whatever you did.
we are in damage control mode.
listen, legs.
i'm at my limit for bad advice.
one man steers the s.s. fitz and that's me.
what are you doing, infidel?
stealing fine-liner pens?
it is worse than camel smuggling!
no!
see...
i heard...
a noise.
i came in to investigate and found this:
c4, blasting caps, timers...
you ought to be careful with that.
someone wishes to tar us with the brush of terrorism.
home.
someone who is totally not me.
josh, help us find out who is trying to frame us and you will reap a great reward.
like a sammich?
all the sandwiches you can imagine.
i can imagine two sandwiches and a bag of chips.
deal!
yes!
excuse me...
how did you not get arrested?
not one hundred percent on that.
there you are!
the old prick himself.
mr. van bulow, before you vilify richard,
i should remind you that he was drinking at your establishment so whatever he did is as much your responsibility as it is his.
i would think twice before you go to the press.
defamation is a two-way street.
whoa.
easy, ginger.
you're right, ace.
she is a pistol.
ace?
there's no need to blow this out of proportion.
sometimes people just say and do things they don't mean.
well then those people should take a page from the book of fitz.
he's a man of his word.
we do have some unfinished business between us.
bring it on.
that's what we like about you ace - your enthusiasm.
it'll be good to get some fresh blood into this place.
i'll see you at the initiation.
not if i see you first.
you'll never see me coming.
fuck me if i'm wrong, but did he seem happy to see me?
he's screwing with you fitz.
or whatever i got up to last night got me the old money vote.
see?
stick with me, kid.
yeah, i'm sure that's it.
you're just oh so charming he overlooked all of this.
if you're going to be annoying like larry, at least keep track of my shit the way he does.
where the fuck are my car keys?
oh, that's right!
the coat check girl...
oh, of course.
you remember the hot chick.
well, everyone's got their priorities.
and some are bigger than others.
that's blood.
grotty one, have you learned anything?
i'm working on it...
are those my sandwiches?
ken hired someone to plant that c4 on you.
and this interloper is...?
very, very conflicted.
he has a past with ken, but you're starting to grow on him.
we must find this treasonous hyena and castrate him.
no, you don't.
he's just a pawn.
josh is right.
what matters is why does the elder fitzpatrick engage in such subterfuge.
apparently, he wants the dealership back.
selling cars is all he knows.
even if he got it back, he cannot sell cars.
our agreement includes a non-competition clause.
fitzpatrick cannot own a dealership.
any dealership.
unless he opened it in someone else's name and then...
he has found a loophole.
cousin.
he must be stopped.
this isn't right.
that's way better.
richard, if you have coitus with the virginal coat check girl, they will kill you.
tell me you didn't sleep with her.
it doesn't make any sense.
why does the coat check girl have to be a virgin?
these rich fucks will collect anything:
cars, art, hymens.
if they wanted to kill you, why didn't they kill you last night?
or an hour ago?
good question.
you stay here and ask.
let me know how it pans out.
that's far enough, mr. fitzpatrick.
there you are.
get him.
it's time.
time for what?
ace, you are a card.
what the fuck!
i can't do this anymore.
i'm out.
what the fuck is this shit?
i broke the first rule of the spy game.
i got too close to my target.
i crossed the line with pastrami.
i don't know whose side i'm on anymore, man.
you will stick it out until the end, shit smear, or i swear to god i will destroy you.
see?
it never ends.
you spy on them, they spy on you.
you plant evidence on them and they suspect you're opening a dealership in someone else's name.
they think what?
they think you've found some loophole in your sales contract.
you can't open your own place, but someone else - like a relative or some shit - can.
you fucking genius.
you're fired.
the sacred talisman of anzu.
passed down through our people for centuries.
anzu is our past and our future.
anzu grants us youth and vitality.
wealth, power and 3 under par.
but she requires a tribute that can only be paid in blood.
you don't need to murder us both, do you?
that would be overkill.
look reg, if you're going to snuff me, at least tell me what the fuck happened last night.
you don't remember tearing our club apart?
telling us all to eff off?
saying our traditions were nonsense?
that deep down we all wanted to be you?
oh good.
i did tell you.
and then you deflowered the coat check girl.
she was to be tonight's virgin sacrifice.
i know you fuck up a lot but this has got to be a personal best.
this is your shitpile, lady.
you have to apologize, fitz.
me?
coming here was larry's idea.
it'll be wonderful, richard.
tradition and...
i'm a loser.
i do not sound like that...
do i?
richard!
you're ok!
you're going to kill larry?
a virgin's a virgin.
sacrifice him and all your dreams will come true.
wealth.
power.
privilege.
our political endorsement.
cast off the sins of your degenerate father and join us...
sounds like a fair deal.
richard, i want you to know that i won't hold it against you.
that's fair.
seeing as how this is all your fucking fault.
it is my fault.
i've learned my lesson.
and i accept my punishment for all the horrible things i've done:
like killing that poor titmouse
shut up about that fucking bird!
you killed a bird?
uh huh, forcing you to compromise your values for political and financial gain.
a compromise that will give you everything you want.
excuse me!
this is a private conversation!
i have to say, this is very tempting.
you been fucking up my life for a long time, larry.
then do it.
my karmic debt must be paid.
if anyone is going to sacrifice me to a pagan god,
i'm glad it's you.
i hope you learn something from this.
no no no!
not his heart!
when it's a male sacrifice, we cut off his johnson and feast upon it.
that is the secret of our virility.
yeah, i'm out.
you all eat penis?
fucking help me.
get him!
tell him to get back, or the bird gets it!
you think you can run?
get back, you cock-loving motherfuckers!
get him!
nice to meet you!
i don't care about your artificial hips!
get them!
run!
get 'em!
get in, larry!
drive!
i need a fucking drink.
hock this.
told you i'd get those fuckers to contribute to my campaign.
but that's grand larceny.
then ransom it back to them and we'll call it a kidnapping.
and piss them off even more?
we saw their little penis party.
they won't do shit.
but- drop it, foxley.
you guys do things your way.
i'll do them my way.
or, we could consider this a cautionary tale against alcohol and philandering.
maybe sometimes your father does know best.
fuck that.
my old man's a washed up half-sack.
he's finished.
you're all going down, fuckers!
__file_terminal__
hey, will.
wanted to tell you something, but we forgot.
okay.
thanks for coming.
no, wait.
was it about his hair?
yes, you already told me that my hair looks like that chocolate topping that hardens when you put it on ice cream.
it totally does.
our business here is done.
wait.
i know what it was...
trans am.
right.
my trans am's been acting up again.
i gotta take it into the shop.
it's lurching and sputtering and making weird noises.
sounds like me when i try to dance.
will.
love yourself, man.
you need to follow me to the garage.
craig, you need to bring the booty mug.
the booty mug?
you still use that thing?
'course.
gives me street cred with guys who do manly jobs.
the pipes are corroded.
it's gonna cost you 1,000 bucks.
1,000?
you sure about that, chief?
you seem like a pretty good guy.
i can probably do it for $200.
all right.
i'm gonna go look at some "playboys.
call me when you're done.
you got it.
there isn't anything that mug can't do.
kenny, you should just work on your car yourself.
there's nothing like the satisfaction of fixing something with your own hands.
will, you know i have no mechanical skills.
my only true skills are lick-bathing myself like a cat and shake-drying myself like a dog.
one time i walked in on you taking a bath belly-down like a seal.
keeps my butt-tocks cool. so...
i've got news.
grant and i are thinking of moving in together.
really?
well, that is great.
i got to say, this is the healthiest relationship that you have ever had.
but first i want to provoke him into having a big, ugly fight.
there's the girl i know.
it's just, we've never fought, and i want to know what that's like before i commit.
well, that makes sense, theresa says, not meaning it, but trying to be supportive.
when i was with kenny, fighting was the worst thing about our marriage...
that, and sleeping with him was like being steamrolled by a bag of elbows.
well, good luck getting grant to fight.
it'd be easier to get a rainbow to flip you off.
i know.
the man has no buttons to push.
this one, however, is all buttons.
hey, kenny.
shmermi.
shmermi?
what the hell does that mean?
you're relentless!
you guys ready to go?
shut up, bro.
didn't mean that.
that was the booty mug talkin'.
since you're following me to the mechanic's, you should know that something clear and sticky is spewing out of the trans am's tailpipe.
it is outrageously flammable, so keep your distance.
i don't know why you keep that piece of junk, kenny.
i still think dad only gave it to you as punishment for quitting football.
i didn't quit football.
i was thrown off the team for crying, and that car's just a little quirky.
no, it's a giant quirk that's a little car-y.
i worked on it with dad when we were kids, kenny.
i should know.
let it die already.
it's just showing its age.
who here among us hasn't, at some point in their lives, spewed a clear, flammable liquid?
my god.
am i the only one?
compression's out of whack, rings are shot, timing belt needs replacing.
i'm gonna nod like i understand, but i have no idea what you're talking about.
all right, try this... $5,000.
craig?
booty?
do something.
you sure about that number, big dog?
you seem like a good guy.
can't help you with the money, but i'd love to go bowling with you sometime.
no!
kenny, come here.
we can totally fix your trans am ourselves.
i have tons of car tools...
lifts, gauges, uh, one of those wrenches, uh, what's it called?
goes...
you're not inspiring confidence.
ratchet.
yes, they're filthy animals, but how does that help us?
kenny, i fix stuff around the house all the time.
come on.
we can totally do this.
okay, will.
i will fix this car with you.
tiny little baby lips.
i'm sorry.
there was a lot of fumes in the trans am on the way over.
yeah, looks like what we've got here is some of those steel-belted sons of bitches?
hey.
nice mug.
no.
it's just an ironic anti-objectification...
no, seriously, i love it.
it's funny.
it's great to see a guy who's not afraid to be a guy.
i'm becky.
i'm craig.
so tell me about yourself.
wait, i'm not interested...
because i'm a guy.
i'm taking out the recycling.
i'll do it.
it's my house.
but, brenda, that's recycling.
yeah, but i've been thinking, who really cares about the planet?
as long as it holds up till i'm dead, screw the next generation.
so grant cleans when he gets mad?
i know.
isn't that weird?
he's handsome, charming, and now this.
if you tell me that nagging makes him horny,
i'm gonna kill you.
the guy's even ironing my sheets.
i feel like the pope.
for some reason, i've always imagined that the pope has a hot black guy that irons his sheets.
so what happened to finding out if you should move in together?
yeah, i'm putting that on the back burner, which, by the way, is very clean.
uncle kenny and daddy are arguing in the garage.
they said i could have ice cream if i didn't tell you the bad words they said.
chocolate, please.
how can you mix up my car parts with pieces of your lawn mower?
i just put a few pieces in the wrong pile, okay?
i know what i'm doing, kenny.
who's the one who got the master cylinder out?
we didn't need to take the master cylinder out!
yeah?
well, then, how were we supposed to get to the screwdriver that i dropped?
yeah, this looks about right.
boys, why don't you consider this the autopsy and just get rid of the body?
i can fix this.
i'm the one who figured out how to get our hands unstuck from the air conditioner vent, wasn't i?
we're stuck.
does anybody even know we're here?
i knew this is how death would find me.
that wasn't exactly a challenge.
we just had to calm down and unclench our fists.
i'm serious, will.
this already feels like one of those projects that you start and never gets done, like lucy's swing set.
lucy doesn't have a swing set.
she only has a bag of bolts and chains and swings she plays with next to her lumber pile.
damn it, will.
hey, hey.
i'm gonna finish that.
theresa just gets impatient.
she doesn't understand that sometimes a guy needs a little break to come up with a plan.
i don't want this thing in my garage forever.
if it's still here in a week,
i'm gonna take care of it myself.
honestly, kenny, you should just let it die a dignified death, like we didn't do with grandma.
this car is nothing like grandma.
it doesn't spit or slap or say racist things.
but if you don't put it back together,
i'm-a do all that, you lazy, lily-white snow devil.
so i went on my date with becky, the tow truck driver, and i wore that belt buckle my uncle roger gave me that just says, "balls.
i never understood that buckle.
it needs a verb or something.
real men don't use verbs.
so...
i problem becky.
you me advice.
you need to use verbs.
fine.
becky's great...
pretty, firm handshake, conversationally vulgar...
everything you'd want in a woman.
the thing is...
she's a sexist.
she has a problem with men?
no, not with men.
stupid woman driver.
most women should be banned from the road.
and look at her cry.
crybaby.
what are you, on your period?
okay.
here's my advice.
dump her.
i need different advice.
then put up with her.
i can't, will.
sexism goes against everything i believe.
people who ascribe stereotypical traits to a group of other people are all the same, and they should be rounded up and treated as inferior.
maybe you should talk to her.
tell her it bothers you.
i want to, but how does a guy wearing a testicle-referencing belt buckle talk about his feelings?
i trouble.
hey!
i need my car, will.
what are you wearing?
shorts.
i've been riding my bike to go do my rounds because some idiot took apart my car and won't put it back together again!
i'm figuring it out.
i went online to do some research, but i didn't find anything helpful.
but i did see this really funny video of this fat kid on a roller coaster.
you will fix this car, will.
you will, will.
the question is, can he?
what?
no, i'm saying, "can he?
what?
can he" fix the car?
i'm not gonna fix it.
he took it apart.
he should do it.
who, will?
he will!
i know!
he, will.
you, kenny.
i, craig.
see, this is how real men talk.
hi, will.
what's the matter?
does it upset you when someone takes apart your car and doesn't put it back together?
weird.
so that's what we're gonna do?
well, remember, i'm the one with all the tools!
except the biggest tool of all...
you!
mr. patterson.
whales are stupid and they take up too much room in the ocean.
these get washed on gentle.
it's just you.
you almost triggered my flight-or-curl-up-into-a-ball response.
i hope you don't mind i let myself in.
brenda figured out i clean when i get angry, and she's been taking advantage of that.
i don't want her to benefit from her extremely effective sneak-ery.
so why don't you just talk to her about your feelings?
isn't that what you hippies do?
i'm worried if i talk to her about it, i'll get angry, and that'll make me clean, and around and around we'll go.
then why don't you make her angry so she sees how it feels?
that's the only language that tiny sack of evil understands.
okay.
how do i make her angry?
well, when we were married,
i discovered a few things that piss her off.
accidentally throwing up on her while she's sleeping on the plane, accidentally throwing up on her while trying to get an eyelash out of her eye, accidentally throwing up on...
if possible, i'd love to get out of the whole upchuck arena.
well, she does hate being scared.
i once jumped out of a pile of laundry.
she got so mad...
it made me throw up on her.
scare her?
like, "boo!"?
not quite.
let me get a beer, and we'll work on it.
boo.
that was better?
what the hell?
i meant to tell you, will stopped by earlier and disassembled your refrigerator.
and you just let him?
i don't know what sort of arrangement you fellas have.
and that's why i gave up cage fighting.
i love fighting, of course.
i just hate being caged in.
my brothers love fighting, too.
you should fight them sometime.
yeah.
she didn't add the check right.
big surprise...
a woman who can't do math.
you know, becky, you say a lot of negative things about women.
yeah.
now let's go home and get those pants off you, dummy.
okay.
now.
okay.
i'm gonna tear you up.
i'm in.
kenny.
sorry, will.
my money's on kenny.
so becky and i went out last night, and she was god-awful, but i didn't say anything because my wiener wanted to have a sexy adventure.
anyway, i figure it's not wrong for me to keep seeing becky as long as i counterbalance her sexist behavior.
so whenever i'm not with her,
i'm gonna be extra, extra, super-duper supportive of women.
i started this morning.
let me...
i'm sorry, i was about to treat you like an incapable woman, but instead, i will celebrate your powerful female ability.
you go, girl.
you can do it.
lift that water.
you go, girl.
you do it.
you can lift that water.
lift that water.
i'm still fine-tuning the concept.
what you're doing is crazy.
yeah, well, from the looks of your desk, you certainly know crazy.
in fact, you're a barmaid sitting on crazy's lap, and crazy is drunk, trying to unbutton your blouse, and you're not doing anything to stop him.
how am i supposed to answer that?
one second.
hi, will.
sorry we missed you.
it's the screws from your desk.
we're taking a personal day.
boop.
well, hey, guys.
i just got a text from theresa.
you only have four days to fix my car before she gets rid of it.
my god.
what happened to your desk?
i would have been done fixing your car by now if you hadn't distracted me by acting all crazy.
you know crazy.
and once crazy gets your blouse unbuttoned, he takes you out to a field by the train tracks, lays you down on a dog blanket.
you just keep staring up at that moon, hoping one day you'll get out of this town and prove your daddy wrong, because you're a dancer, damn it...
that's it.
i'm outta here.
what's his problem?
i have no idea.
not my favorite suit.
no!
i hope revenge suits you, william j.
keen.
i'm just saying, that car's taking up room in the garage,
i can smell it in the house, and i need it out of here.
well, i'm not gonna fix it now.
your brother's being too big a jerk.
will, would you come here a minute?
i know you don't want to back down for some stupid man reason, but can you please fix my brother's car, preferably tonight so i can pee without crouching like an ancient roman?
i can't fix his car.
you were right about me.
i don't finish things.
i jus...
i get overwhelmed and i give up.
if i really picked apart my personality,
i'd have to say...
forget it.
well, i'm giving up on the toilet, too, and that's sad, since it's been the site of some of my greatest victories.
look, maybe you just need to pick one thing and follow through on it, just to show yourself you can do it...
not fixing the toilet, because the stakes are too high, but this did all start with kenny's car.
you're right.
i need to see something through to the end.
and i'm gonna get started on that right now.
it's happening!
global warming!
it's you.
what are you doing in my sleeping quarters?
i'm taking apart your bed.
i'm not gonna quit this, kenny.
i need to prove to myself that i can finish something, and that thing is this ridiculous war with you.
why don't you just finish putting my car back together, you butt-piston?
because i have no mechanical abilities whatsoever.
then why did you take it apart in the first place?
because i have no reasoning abilities whatsoever.
so i'm gonna disassemble your life piece by piece until there's nothing left but a pile of beard hair and silly t-shirts.
i've never seen you this way before.
you're so determined.
such man-like qualities.
it's like you have a booty mug...
inside your soul.
okay.
clearly, you want this more than i do.
you win.
i'm gonna figure out another way to fix my car.
really?
yeah.
i saw something through to the end?
yes!
take that, crazy!
you were wrong about me.
i am a dancer.
you go, will!
live your dreams for the rest of us!
you maniac.
wait!
what are you doing?
i'm sorry, kenny.
time's up.
i know you have a lot of memories with this car, but it's time to let it go, sweetie.
okay, get this piece of crap outta here.
no!
not trans am-mie!
you can't tow it if i'm sitting in it!
god.
hey!
ow!
son of a...
hang on!
so do we have six more weeks of winter, or what?
ha.
that's very funny.
let me out.
not until you do to this car what we're pretty sure that disgruntled nurse did to grandma.
fine.
i'll reach the latch myself.
i choose to stay here for now.
okay.
i don't understand why you hate this car so much, theresa.
because it's a jerk.
it's not a jerk.
i should know what it is, kenny.
i was the one who spent a summer working on it with dad, rebuilding the engine, replacing the gears in the differential.
i think i see what's going on here.
you're upset...
about... somethin'.
i'm upset because after all of that work, dad gave you the car instead of me, and it should have been mine.
dad was not a great dad, theresa.
when i was 10, i caught a frog, i wanted to keep it as a pet, and he wanted to eat its legs.
guess who won?
and they were delicious.
on my prom night, i had a pimple, and dad pointed at it in front of my date and called it "mount facemore.
i'm sorry dad didn't give you the car, theresa.
why don't you take it now?
how about this instead?
i'll help you get it running if you let me drive it every once in a while...
like, when i have a cold and i can't smell anything.
deal.
high five?
hello and welcome to the first "hearthstone insurance career day for girls.
our theme is "craig empowers future women." applaud.
no!
don't do what i say just because i'm a man.
hey, there you are.
i was in the neighborhood.
thought i'd see if you wanted to grab a steak or somethin'.
what are you doing?
nothing.
i just wandered in here.
wh...
mr. griffith invited my class to hear a talk about a... career for girls.
i don't know who that is.
you're really talking to these girls about careers?
that's a waste.
why is it a waste?
well, first of all, most of you should not and will never have real jobs.
you'll just find a guy to take care of you, squirt out a couple of kids, and try and hold on to your looks.
wait a minute, wait a minute.
becky, i'm sorry, but your views about women are absolutely horrible.
i thought i could get over it because we had fantastic...
playtime together.
i mean, really good, creative stuff.
but the bottom line is i think women can be whatever they want.
like a doctor or a lawyer or...
what do you want to be, sweetheart?
a unicorn!
and you will be.
you see, becky?
i'm a feminist, and while i wish she had said something like "astronaut" instead of a made-up creature,
i think that these girls can do whatever they put their minds to.
i don't believe this.
your booty mug is a liar.
and to think i almost let you fight my four brothers,
mikey, tommy, danny, and steve.
four of 'em?
this is a good man!
let's parade him around on our shoulders!
i don't think that's a good i...
actually, you know what?
what am i saying?
if you can dream it, you can do it, ladies!
hoist away!
boo!
so much for my nine years of karate.
my god.
why did you scare me?
i was trying to teach you a lesson about what it feels like to be emotionally toyed with.
i did not anticipate it ending in a stabbing.
frankly, i'm surprised about that, too.
the truth is...
i'm scared about moving in together.
maybe we should talk.
good idea.
i'll start.
sometimes it's important to let go of things so you can move on.
will had to let go of wanting to be the kind of guy who could fix things.
for theresa, it was letting go of her anger toward her dad.
for brenda and grant, it was letting go of their fears so they could take the plunge and move in together.
but while it's important to let things go, it's also important to realize that some things are worth holding on to.
why are you telling us all this?
seriously, who are these people?
they're my friends, and i wanted you to hear what they learned so you realize that you, too, can let go of anything that keeps you from your dreams.
this is boring.
i thought coming to an insurance company would be fun.
frankly, tess, with an attitude like that, you'll never be a unicorn.
anyway, i learned to let go of something, too.
good-bye, booty mug.
__file_terminal__
stay sharp, guys.
we gotta win tonight.
we cannot go to game seven.
sure we can.
the tournament's the best of seven, so we definitely can go to game seven.
had you said, "i prefer not going to game seven
or "we shan't go to game seven,
that would have been more accurate.
and more eloquent.
whatever.
these tournament games go on late, and i wake theresa when i get in bed, which she hasn't been happy about.
i'd really like to wrap this up tonight, so i need you to focus.
you got it, buddy.
so, kenny, how's the new egg chair?
fantasteesh.
i put in surround sound and a butt warmer.
i got a beverage tube.
it's like a giant robot chicken laid this just for my comfort.
so we're not gonna focus then?
of course we are.
hey, craigger, how's the new girl?
does she really just like watching you play video games?
yep.
she is great.
we are talking about you, sunshine.
focus, honey.
you don't want this tournament going to game seven.
yeah.
that's how will should have said it.
i'm taking fire, guys.
who's got my back?
where are you?
i'm reloading the sangria reservoir.
i'm totally focused, bill.
and we're going to game seven.
i thought we were gonna try and wrap this up tonight!
isn't it fantastic?
i've wanted a family portrait like this ever since we had kids.
my goodness.
why are you all so small and flat?
i'm just kidding.
that's my impression of the first guy who ever saw a painting.
looks like the artist got a little generous with your cleavage.
yeah, he insisted my body type could handle it.
he said i'll get used to them.
yeah.
good morning.
that's a nice-looking family gathered around those boobs.
how'd you sleep?
terrible.
you woke me up when you finally came to bed, and the neighbor's stupid motion detector light was going off again all night, shining in our window.
our new neighbor is a jerk.
it's not just the light.
every time the kids lose a ball over his fence, he refuses to give it back.
i have no tolerance for that.
will, you need to go over there and get your balls back.
i know that sounds like a metaphor, but it is not, because that man has your actual balls, which also sounds like a metaphor and also is not.
i talked to him.
believe me, we really went at it.
hi, glenn.
what?
so i-i was trying to fish my kids' balls out of your backyard with my rake, and so n-now you also have my rake...
and my longer rake, and... okay.
well, at least your stupid video game tournament is over so i don't have to worry about you waking me up anymore.
yeah, about that...
the tournament's not actually over.
you said it was only gonna be six games.
i overestimated my team's focus...
in that i thought they had any.
but it's okay.
i don't have to play tonight.
i mean, the... you know, the guys are super excited about it, and it only happens once a year, but...
i can skip it,
even though it's just one more night...
and i love it.
thank you, honey.
i appreciate it.
you told her you weren't gonna play?
why would you do that?
this tournament is as important as anything we will ever do in our lives, right?
if anything, you're understating it.
you know, guys, we wouldn't even have this problem if you'd had my back last night instead of making out with your new girlfriend and messing with your sangria tank.
there was a chunk of orange stuck in my drinking tube.
did you want me to just leave it there?
it could have choked me, will.
you are unbelievable.
first you endanger our entire tournament, and now you want kenny to die?
what is wrong with you?
i got it.
i got the solution.
fortunately for you, i'm a pharmaceutical rep...
with a bagful of tricks, one of which is...
wonunol.
when you can't sleep, take wonunol.
remember...
wonunol.
take one... y'all.
yee-haw!
sleep.
they're still working on the campaign.
anyway, it's all natural.
there's no hangover, and it's tiny, so you can hide one in theresa's applesauce.
i'm not gonna hide drugs in my wife's food.
come on.
but don't worry.
i'm gonna play tonight.
i'll just lie to theresa and tell her i'm not going to, then i'll wear my silk pajamas, and when she's asleep,
i'll slip out of bed like a ninja, a comfortable ninja who's used to the finer things.
i finished my homework.
can i go to bed early?
are you sneaking out tonight?
stealing a car?
hitting the clubs?
no, i just ate too much pie, and i want to go to bed.
nathan, it's okay.
your father's just kidding.
of course you can go to bed.
you got a girl up there?
mom!
it's too easy.
lucy, you go get ready, too.
i'll be right up.
god, i haven't slept more than two hours in a row this week.
if anyone wakes me up again tonight,
i swear i'm gonna kill them to death, and please don't wear those silk pajamas you took out.
really?
why not?
well, they get all staticky, and then i keep getting shocked.
i feel like i'm sleeping with someone who's trying to get information out of me.
you know, i was talking to kenny about your problem, and... and he's kinda like a doctor, and he gave me this...
thing.
it's supposed to be this great new...
sleep supplement or something.
you trying to knock me out so you can play your stupid video game?
what?
i told you, i am not playing tonight.
i'm just trying to help you sleep, and this pill's supposed to be amazing.
i don't like pills.
it's not a pill.
it's really more of, an organic sleep vitamin with metabolism-boosting, uh, anti-aging... molecules.
i think one of the actresses from "mad men" takes it.
really?
that is a smart show.
we are good to go, and we still have an hour to practice before the tournament starts.
so theresa's sleeping?
yep.
i got her to take the wonunol.
that'll do it.
that thing was originally developed as a horse tranquilizer.
they just changed the formula for humans...
by cutting it in half.
you gave my wife a horse tranquilizer?
no, you gave your wife half a horse tranquilizer.
will, it's fine.
trust in science.
pills make everything better.
in ten years, we won't even need people anymore.
it'll just be pills giving each other pills.
yeah, there'll be pill police officers.
there'll be pill firemen.
the pill president.
he'll be pill clinton.
dad?
i threw up pie...
lots and lots of pie, more pie than i ate.
did she say she threw a pie?
it's all right, honey.
guys, i might have a situation.
dad, i don't feel so well.
will, what's going on over there?
i definitely have a situation.
that sound.
god, i miss college.
just gonna throw these sheets in the wash, kids.
stay in the bathroom and aim for anything porcelain.
what are you guys doing here?
we knew your hands were full, so we brought the tvs over so you can play.
and we've still got a half an hour till the game starts, so, we're gonna teach grant how to play, and then he can sub in for you when you get distracted by the disgusting vomitorium that is your home.
although i've never done this before,
i will not let you down.
my only question is...
i deplore violence... is there a button on here for diplomacy?
we've got your back, will.
you don't have my back.
you just don't want to bail on the tournament.
don't do this, will.
not in front of gina.
this is gina.
hey, will.
i'm gina.
don't do this in front of me.
come on, man.
i drove all the way here with my egg chair on top of my car.
if that's not having your back, i don't know what is.
that's not having my back!
then i don't know what is!
guys, the game is not really my priority right now.
my kids have a stomach bug, somebody drugged my wife...
you.
and i'm gonna go start some laundry.
you have a lovely house.
do you mind if i look around?
yeah, sure.
i just met you.
wander around my home.
dad, can i have a glass of water?
i got this, will.
i have a soothing effect on the infirm and, for some reason, the downtrodden and every once in a while, the misbegotten.
so... do you like gina?
yeah, sure.
why not?
she told me not to tell anybody, but she's a kleptomaniac.
she has claws instead of hands?
no, that's not what a kleptomaniac is.
it's somebody who has a compulsion to steal things.
it's a disease.
well, if she has a stealing disease, should we be letting her walk around will's house looking for things to steal?
according to her therapist,
i'm supposed to show her that i trust her.
besides, will doesn't have anything that great anyway.
i'm a bumblebee, and i need to see the moon, because it helps me navigate.
karate chop!
that was weird.
and she's naked from the waist down.
that's very unlike her.
i think i need to check something online.
hey.
so, um, craig's keeping an eye on the kleptomaniac.
what?
right.
let me back up.
hey, will...
gina's a kleptomaniac.
what?
i know!
but you've got a bigger problem.
theresa's up.
god!
what... no...
did she see all the game stuff?
i am so busted.
you said she was gonna sleep all night!
i didn't say she's awake.
i said she's up.
i just went online, and i did a little research on wonunol.
one of the occasional side effects is walking around in a dream state with no pants on, due to an insatiable urge to air-cool the lower torso, commonly called "winnie the poohing.
and that's what she's doing?
very much so.
that's a nice vase.
man, will and theresa would really miss that vase if anybody took it, which i'm sure no one will.
thank you.
it feels so great when you trust me.
here.
i want to give you back your meat thermometer.
this is not mine, but thank you.
don't steal the vase.
hello?
no.
where's theresa?
she sent me an e-mail asking me if i wanted to make pancakes with sting.
obviously, yes, i do, but something just didn't seem right.
everything's fine.
false alarm.
go back to your witch farm.
is that my egg chair?
did you take that out of my garage?
no, that is my egg chair that you spitefully took in our divorce that you never use.
you told your friends i have kleptomania!
it's nothing to be ashamed of.
it's the most common mania to have, after wrestle and beatle.
what was that?
that was craig.
you know craig.
the kids are back in bed.
why are you here?
hello, brenda.
i won't insult your intelligence.
there's some tomfoolery going on around here, and i'm up to my ankles in it.
you...
brenda!
theresa and i... we were, uh, just out for a walk, but, she's tired and so won't be speaking.
good evening, madam.
your table is almost ready.
except for that.
well, good night.
give us back our balls!
hey, will.
we got your back.
god.
now what did you do?
they told me everything.
we tried not to, but then she asked.
look, wonunol's been tested extensively, and patients don't remember a thing the next morning.
of course, most of those patients were horses, but still, we should be fine as long as brenda keeps her vodka chute shut.
yeah, that's winning me over.
brenda, it would really be good if theresa didn't know that i talked her into taking an all-natural clydesdale roofie.
i won't say a thing...
daddy, i threw up in my bed again!
coming, honey!
i'll even help with the kids, as long as assquatch gives me back my chair in its original condition before theresa wakes up.
what?
no way.
that's a terrible deal, guys.
let's walk.
hey, wait.
come on.
kenny!
you're on the hook for this, too.
if theresa finds out what happened, she will hold you down and force you to slap your own face, just like she did last christmas.
yeah, why wouldn't that happen to me?
hey.
did will ask you to do that to his floor?
no, i was looking for some tools so i could dismember my chair so my sister won't make me slap myself in the face again!
have you seen gina?
no!
do you know how to clean paint off of a hardwood floor?
no!
see, you don't like it when i yell at you.
good thinking.
you got paint on the floor.
i knew i could count on you.
my god.
and some got on theresa's eye.
so i got a little paint on the painting.
that's like spilling water in a swimming pool.
you've got to fix this and restore the chair and clean the floor and find the kleptomaniac!
we got your back, will.
and stop saying that!
what are you doing?
where's theresa?
i don't... know.
i'll tell you what.
you check the rest of the house.
i'm gonna wait here for her.
help me find her!
you're leaving?
well, i have to.
you are really disappointing me a lot this evening, craig.
that's an ominous thing to say.
that's not any better, is it?
nope, it's worse.
so gina is getting a little weird.
really?
the kleptomaniac you met on the internet is getting weird?
here.
you're an artist.
go get nathan's paints and fix this thing while i go look for theresa, and you... strip that chair down so that brenda keeps her mouth shut.
will's house is kinda hectic at night, isn't it?
yeah, i couldn't live here.
take that, you light-lovin' ball thief!
now i'll never get my rake back...
or my longer rake.
hey, i need an allen wrench so i can keep murdering my chair.
take care of this while i get theresa inside.
rickshaw!
what?
goody.
another task.
okay, so theresa's sleeping again or... still...
or whatever the hell she's been doing.
and i finished that painting.
hang on.
great.
and i developed a pretty good move where i spin in a circle, firing indiscriminately.
i call it the "tornado of death,
so if you hear me yell, "tornado of death,
find a ditch and pray.
maybe this will work out.
brenda's with the kids.
the game starts in five minutes.
i think we might have pulled this off, buddy.
couple problems.
i'm hoping they're not related.
the painting has disappeared, and gina's car is gone.
are... are you kidding?
that's it.
i'm dead.
theresa's gonna kill me.
no, will.
the four of us are gonna go get that painting back.
but your precious video game is about to start.
this whole evening is my... friend kenny's fault.
should we forgive him?
don't see how we can.
should he be punished?
unmercifully.
i think what craig is trying to say is, he brought the klepto over, and so the whole thing is his fault, and even though that is, without doubt or controversy, the only explanation for tonight,
i'm gonna help you, too.
i agree.
kenny's entirely to blame, and this conversation is over.
no restarts, infinity.
even though i have no responsibility for any of this because i am in no way at fault, i want to help, too.
again, summing up, grant... helpful but blameless.
now let's do this.
gina, honey?
i think there may have been a misunderstanding about whose painting of will's family that is.
you hurt my feelings, craig.
go away.
baby...
okay.
no more coddling.
listen up, you psycho.
my god!
my eyes!
my beautiful eyes!
kenny.
aah!
they're ruined!
guys!
guys, come on.
there's an open window.
but what...
i'm going in!
shh, kenny!
no!
god!
shh, kenny!
bees!
rose-scented bees!
kenny, no, shh!
it's rosebushes!
look, we need a ladder or... or suits of leather or a-a japanese garden bridge.
that would be lovely.
here's what we're gonna do.
i'm gonna lie down.
you guys grab my arms and legs, swing me back and forth, build up some momentum, and then toss me as hard as you can.
i'll twist in the air, grab the window, and pull myself in.
any questions?
nobody?
really?
okay, i'll go.
are you insane?
will, i can do this.
i did gymnastics in high school for, like, six weeks.
watch.
god, you sound so nimble.
the trick is to let go of my arms a split second before you let go of my legs, so i twist in the air and i can grab the window frame with my hands.
remember, arms and then legs.
it's critical that you do it in that order.
otherwise, this might not work.
come on.
i'll call it out.
all right.
here.
here, here, here.
okay.
hey.
and... swing.
and keep swinging.
remember, it's arms and then legs.
here we go.
one...
two... here it goes.
arms, legs.
arms, legs!
no!
aah!
did he make it?
is he in?
wrong!
that was wrong!
craig?
gentlemen.
what's going on here tonight?
how you doing, spider-man?
truthfully, i'm in a lot of pain.
it was nice of gina to give us the painting back.
the police made her give it back because she stole it because there's a monkey in a wedding dress jumping on a trampoline where her brain should be.
she has a disease, kenny.
would you talk that way about somebody who had freckles or an itchy trigger finger or a case of the munchies?
you don't know what diseases are, do you, craig?
guys, please.
i just had the worst night of my life.
all i want is one moment of quiet before i walk into my house and have the worst morning of my life.
keen!
get over here!
you said fix it.
it wouldn't wash off.
you know anything about this, keen, huh?
you know what, glenn?
i do know something about this, and if you had adjusted your stupid motion light,
i never would have treated my wife like a horse and none of this would have happened, and, yes, that does make sense, so move the light and throw my kids' balls back, or you are gonna find all kinds of crazy-ass things
painted all over your house.
you understand?
yeah.
sure.
good, and no more mowing your lawn in your khaki pants.
i don't like it.
it's weird.
listen, last night when gina took the painting, you guys really did have my back, so thank you.
sure.
you got it.
it was worth it.
plus i learned when you run into police in the middle of the night, it goes a whole lot smoother if you're with a bunch of white dudes.
well, here goes.
put the painting in the hallway.
there they are.
brenda told me everything.
thank you for taking care of the kids and letting me sleep.
god, that pill really worked!
i feel so much better.
wonunol...
say...
to insomnia.
i gotta pop the sheets in the dryer.
mwah.
you didn't tell her?
i love theresa, and i figured it would break her heart if she found out what an idiot she married.
it would.
it really, really would...
but where does she think we were?
i told her you all got up early to clean out my garage, which you will be doing today.
also, i hid all your adolescent crap around the side of the house, including the egg chair that you can keep, kenny.
it was enough just to watch you destroy...
your precious nerd capsule.
i shall rebuild it, and it shall be stronger, faster, with a sunroof and a thing to pee in.
will, could you come here for a second?
look at my eye.
what happened?
i have no idea...
but i think your body type can handle it.
__file_terminal__
stay sharp, guys.
we gotta win tonight.
we cannot go to game seven.
sure we can.
the tournament's the best of seven, so we definitely can go to game seven.
had you said, "i prefer not going to game seven
or "we shan't go to game seven,
that would have been more accurate.
and more eloquent.
whatever.
these tournament games go on late, and i wake theresa when i get in bed, which she hasn't been happy about.
i'd really like to wrap this up tonight, so i need you to focus.
you got it, buddy.
so, kenny, how's the new egg chair?
fantasteesh.
i put in surround sound and a butt warmer.
i got a beverage tube.
it's like a giant robot chicken laid this just for my comfort.
so we're not gonna focus then?
of course we are.
hey, craigger, how's the new girl?
does she really just like watching you play video games?
yep.
she is great.
we are talking about you, sunshine.
focus, honey.
you don't want this tournament going to game seven.
yeah.
that's how will should have said it.
i'm taking fire, guys.
who's got my back?
where are you?
i'm reloading the sangria reservoir.
i'm totally focused, bill.
and we're going to game seven.
aw!
i thought we were gonna try and wrap this up tonight!
isn't it fantastic?
i've wanted a family portrait like this ever since we had kids.
oh, my goodness.
why are you all so small and flat?
i'm just kidding.
that's my impression of the first guy who ever saw a painting.
looks like the artist got a little generous with your cleavage.
yeah, he insisted my body type could handle it.
he said i'll get used to them.
yeah.
good morning.
that's a nice-looking family gathered around those boobs.
how'd you sleep?
terrible.
you woke me up when you finally came to bed, and the neighbor's stupid motion detector light was going off again all night, shining in our window.
huh?
our new neighbor is a jerk.
it's not just the light.
every time the kids lose a ball over his fence, he refuses to give it back.
i have no tolerance for that.
will, you need to go over there and get your balls back.
i know that sounds like a metaphor, but it is not, because that man has your actual balls, which also sounds like a metaphor and also is not.
oh, i talked to him.
believe me, we really went at it.
hi, glenn.
what?
so i-i was trying to fish my kids' balls out of your backyard with my rake, and so n-now you also have my rake...
uh, and my longer rake, and... okay.
well, at least your stupid video game tournament is over so i don't have to worry about you waking me up anymore.
yeah, uh, uh, about that...
uh, the tournament's not actually over.
you said it was only gonna be six games.
i overestimated my team's focus...
in that i thought they had any.
ugh.
but it's okay.
i don't have to play tonight.
i mean, the... you know, the guys are super excited about it, and it only happens once a year, but, uh...
i can skip it,
even though it's just one more night...
and i love it.
thank you, honey.
i appreciate it.
mm.
you told her you weren't gonna play?
why would you do that?
this tournament is as important as anything we will ever do in our lives, right?
if anything, you're understating it.
you know, guys, we wouldn't even have this problem if you'd had my back last night instead of making out with your new girlfriend and messing with your sangria tank.
there was a chunk of orange stuck in my drinking tube.
did you want me to just leave it there?
it could have choked me, will.
you are unbelievable.
first you endanger our entire tournament, and now you want kenny to die?
what is wrong with you?
i got it.
i got the solution.
fortunately for you, i'm a pharmaceutical rep...
with a bagful of tricks, one of which is...
wonunol.
when you can't sleep, take wonunol.
remember...
wonunol.
take one... y'all.
yee-haw!
sleep.
they're still working on the campaign.
anyway, it's all natural.
there's no hangover, and it's tiny, so you can hide one in theresa's applesauce.
i'm not gonna hide drugs in my wife's food.
oh, come on.
but don't worry.
i'm gonna play tonight.
i'll just lie to theresa and tell her i'm not going to, then i'll wear my silk pajamas, and when she's asleep,
i'll slip out of bed like a ninja, a comfortable ninja who's used to the finer things.
i finished my homework.
can i go to bed early?
are you sneaking out tonight?
stealing a car?
hitting the clubs?
no, i just ate too much pie, and i want to go to bed.
nathan, it's okay.
your father's just kidding.
of course you can go to bed.
you got a girl up there?
mom!
it's too easy.
lucy, you go get ready, too.
i'll be right up.
god, i haven't slept more than two hours in a row this week.
if anyone wakes me up again tonight,
i swear i'm gonna kill them to death, and please don't wear those silk pajamas you took out.
really?
why not?
well, they get all staticky, and then i keep getting shocked.
i feel like i'm sleeping with someone who's trying to get information out of me.
huh.
you know, i was talking to kenny about your problem, and... and he's kinda like a doctor, and he gave me this...
thing.
it's supposed to be this great new...
sleep supplement or something.
you trying to knock me out so you can play your stupid video game?
what?
i told you, i am not playing tonight.
i'm just trying to help you sleep, and this pill's supposed to be amazing.
i don't like pills.
it's not a pill.
it's really more of, uh, an organic sleep vitamin with metabolism-boosting, uh, anti-aging... molecules.
i think one of the actresses from "mad men" takes it.
really?
that is a smart show.
we are good to go, and we still have an hour to practice before the tournament starts.
so theresa's sleeping?
yep.
i got her to take the wonunol.
that'll do it.
that thing was originally developed as a horse tranquilizer.
they just changed the formula for humans... by cutting it in half.
you gave my wife a horse tranquilizer?
no, you gave your wife half a horse tranquilizer.
will, it's fine.
trust in science.
pills make everything better.
in ten years, we won't even need people anymore.
it'll just be pills giving each other pills.
yeah, there'll be pill police officers.
there'll be pill firemen.
the pill president.
he'll be pill clinton.
dad?
i threw up pie...
lots and lots of pie, more pie than i ate.
did she say she threw a pie?
it's all right, honey.
guys, i might have a situation.
dad, uh, i don't feel so well.
ohh!
will, what's going on over there?
i definitely have a situation.
ugh.
that sound.
god, i miss college.
just gonna throw these sheets in the wash, kids.
stay in the bathroom and aim for anything porcelain.
what are you guys doing here?
uh, we knew your hands were full, so we brought the tvs over so you can play.
and we've still got a half an hour till the game starts, so, uh, we're gonna teach grant how to play, and then he can sub in for you when you get distracted by the disgusting vomitorium that is your home.
although i've never done this before,
i will not let you down.
my only question is...
i deplore violence... is there a button on here for diplomacy?
we've got your back, will.
you don't have my back.
you just don't want to bail on the tournament.
don't do this, will.
not in front of gina.
oh, this is gina.
hey, will.
i'm gina.
don't do this in front of me.
come on, man.
i drove all the way here with my egg chair on top of my car.
if that's not having your back, i don't know what is.
that's not having my back!
then i don't know what is!
guys, the game is not really my priority right now.
my kids have a stomach bug, somebody drugged my wife...
you.
and i'm gonna go start some laundry.
you have a lovely house.
do you mind if i look around?
yeah, sure.
i just met you.
wander around my home.
dad, can i have a glass of water?
i got this, will.
i have a soothing effect on the infirm and, for some reason, the downtrodden and every once in a while, the misbegotten.
so... do you like gina?
yeah, sure.
why not?
she told me not to tell anybody, but she's a kleptomaniac.
she has claws instead of hands?
no, that's not what a kleptomaniac is.
oh.
it's somebody who has a compulsion to steal things.
it's a disease.
well, if she has a stealing disease, should we be letting her walk around will's house looking for things to steal?
according to her therapist,
i'm supposed to show her that i trust her.
besides, will doesn't have anything that great anyway.
i'm a bumblebee, and i need to see the moon, because it helps me navigate.
karate chop!
that was weird.
and she's naked from the waist down.
that's very unlike her.
i think i need to check something online.
hey.
so, um, craig's keeping an eye on the kleptomaniac.
what?
right.
let me back up.
uh, hey, will... gina's a kleptomaniac.
what?
i know!
but you've got a bigger problem.
theresa's up.
oh, god!
what... no...
did she see all the game stuff?
i am so busted.
you said she was gonna sleep all night!
i didn't say she's awake.
i said she's up.
i just went online, and i did a little research on wonunol.
one of the occasional side effects is walking around in a dream state with no pants on, due to an insatiable urge to air-cool the lower torso, commonly called "winnie the poohing.
and that's what she's doing?
very much so.
that's a nice vase.
man, will and theresa would really miss that vase if anybody took it, which i'm sure no one will.
thank you.
it feels so great when you trust me.
here.
i want to give you back your meat thermometer.
this is not mine, but thank you.
don't steal the vase.
hello?
no.
where's theresa?
she sent me an e-mail asking me if i wanted to make pancakes with sting.
obviously, yes, i do, but something just didn't seem right.
everything's fine.
false alarm.
go back to your witch farm.
is that my egg chair?
did you take that out of my garage?
no, that is my egg chair that you spitefully took in our divorce that you never use.
you told your friends i have kleptomania!
it's nothing to be ashamed of.
it's the most common mania to have, after wrestle and beatle.
what was that?
that was craig.
you know craig.
the kids are back in bed.
why are you here?
hello, brenda.
i won't insult your intelligence.
there's some tomfoolery going on around here, and i'm up to my ankles in it.
you...
brenda!
uh, theresa and i... we were, uh, just out for a walk, but, uh, she's tired and so won't be speaking.
good evening, madam.
your table is almost ready.
except for that.
well, good night.
give us back our balls!
hey, will.
we got your back.
oh, god.
now what did you do?
they told me everything.
we tried not to, but then she asked.
look, wonunol's been tested extensively, and patients don't remember a thing the next morning.
of course, most of those patients were horses, but still, we should be fine as long as brenda keeps her vodka chute shut.
yeah, that's winning me over.
brenda, it would really be good if theresa didn't know that i talked her into taking an all-natural clydesdale roofie.
i won't say a thing... daddy, i threw up in my bed again!
coming, honey!
i'll even help with the kids, as long as assquatch gives me back my chair in its original condition before theresa wakes up.
what?
no way.
that's a terrible deal, guys.
let's walk.
hey, wait.
come on.
kenny!
you're on the hook for this, too.
if theresa finds out what happened, she will hold you down and force you to slap your own face, just like she did last christmas.
yeah, why wouldn't that happen to me?
hey.
did will ask you to do that to his floor?
no, i was looking for some tools so i could dismember my chair so my sister won't make me slap myself in the face again!
have you seen gina?
no!
do you know how to clean paint off of a hardwood floor?
no!
see, you don't like it when i yell at you.
oh, good thinking.
you got paint on the floor.
i knew i could count on you.
oh, my god.
and some got on theresa's eye.
so i got a little paint on the painting.
that's like spilling water in a swimming pool.
you've got to fix this and restore the chair and clean the floor and find the kleptomaniac!
we got your back, will.
and stop saying that!
what are you doing?
where's theresa?
um, i don't... know.
i'll tell you what.
you check the rest of the house.
i'm gonna wait here for her.
help me find her!
you're leaving?
well, i have to.
you are really disappointing me a lot this evening, craig.
huh.
that's an ominous thing to say.
that's not any better, is it?
nope, it's worse.
so gina is getting a little weird.
really?
the kleptomaniac you met on the internet is getting weird?
here.
you're an artist.
go get nathan's paints and fix this thing while i go look for theresa, and you... strip that chair down so that brenda keeps her mouth shut.
wow.
will's house is kinda hectic at night, isn't it?
yeah, i couldn't live here.
take that, you light-lovin' ball thief!
now i'll never get my rake back...
or my longer rake.
hey, i need an allen wrench so i can keep murdering my chair.
take care of this while i get theresa inside.
rickshaw!
what?
oh, goody.
another task.
okay, so theresa's sleeping again or... still... or whatever the hell she's been doing.
and i finished that painting.
hang on.
great.
and i developed a pretty good move where i spin in a circle, firing indiscriminately.
i call it the "tornado of death,
so if you hear me yell, "tornado of death,
find a ditch and pray.
maybe this will work out.
brenda's with the kids.
the game starts in five minutes.
i think we might have pulled this off, buddy.
couple problems.
i'm hoping they're not related.
um, the painting has disappeared, and gina's car is gone.
are... are you kidding?
that's it.
i'm dead.
theresa's gonna kill me.
no, will.
the four of us are gonna go get that painting back.
oh, but your precious video game is about to start.
this whole evening is my... friend kenny's fault.
should we forgive him?
don't see how we can.
should he be punished?
unmercifully.
i think what craig is trying to say is, he brought the klepto over, and so the whole thing is his fault, and even though that is, without doubt or controversy, the only explanation for tonight,
i'm gonna help you, too.
i agree.
kenny's entirely to blame, and this conversation is over.
no restarts, infinity.
gah!
even though i have no responsibility for any of this because i am in no way at fault, i want to help, too.
again, summing up, grant... helpful but blameless.
now let's do this.
gina, honey?
i think there may have been a misunderstanding about whose painting of will's family that is.
you hurt my feelings, craig.
go away.
baby...
okay.
no more coddling.
listen up, you psycho.
oh, my god!
my eyes!
ohh!
my beautiful eyes!
kenny.
aah!
they're ruined!
guys!
guys, come on.
there's an open window.
but what...
i'm going in!
shh, kenny!
no!
oh, god!
shh, kenny!
bees!
rose-scented bees!
kenny, no, shh!
it's rosebushes!
look, we need a ladder or... or suits of leather or a-a japanese garden bridge.
ooh, that would be lovely.
here's what we're gonna do.
i'm gonna lie down.
you guys grab my arms and legs, swing me back and forth, build up some momentum, and then toss me as hard as you can.
i'll twist in the air, grab the window, and pull myself in.
any questions?
nobody?
really?
okay, i'll go.
are you insane?
will, i can do this.
i did gymnastics in high school for, like, six weeks.
watch.
yah!
god, you sound so nimble.
the trick is to let go of my arms a split second before you let go of my legs, so i twist in the air and i can grab the window frame with my hands.
remember, arms and then legs.
it's critical that you do it in that order.
otherwise, this might not work.
come on.
i'll call it out.
all right.
here.
here, here, here.
okay.
hey.
and... swing.
and keep swinging.
remember, it's arms and then legs.
here we go.
one...
two... here it goes.
arms, legs.
arms, legs!
no!
ow, ow!
aah!
did he make it?
is he in?
wrong!
that was wrong!
craig?
gentlemen.
what's going on here tonight?
how you doing, spider-man?
truthfully, i'm in a lot of pain.
ow.
it was nice of gina to give us the painting back.
the police made her give it back because she stole it because there's a monkey in a wedding dress jumping on a trampoline where her brain should be.
she has a disease, kenny.
would you talk that way about somebody who had freckles or an itchy trigger finger or a case of the munchies?
uh...
you don't know what diseases are, do you, craig?
guys, please.
i just had the worst night of my life.
all i want is one moment of quiet before i walk into my house and have the worst morning of my life.
keen!
get over here!
you said fix it.
it wouldn't wash off.
you know anything about this, keen, huh?
you know what, glenn?
i do know something about this, and if you had adjusted your stupid motion light,
i never would have treated my wife like a horse and none of this would have happened, and, yes, that does make sense, so move the light and throw my kids' balls back, or you are gonna find all kinds of crazy-ass things
painted all over your house.
you understand?
uh, yeah.
sure.
good, and no more mowing your lawn in your khaki pants.
i don't like it.
it's weird.
listen, last night when gina took the painting, you guys really did have my back, so thank you.
sure.
you got it.
it was worth it.
plus i learned when you run into police in the middle of the night, it goes a whole lot smoother if you're with a bunch of white dudes.
well, here goes.
put the painting in the hallway.
there they are.
brenda told me everything.
thank you for taking care of the kids and letting me sleep.
god, that pill really worked!
i feel so much better.
wonunol..."
say... to insomnia.
oh.
i gotta pop the sheets in the dryer.
mwah.
you didn't tell her?
i love theresa, and i figured it would break her heart if she found out what an idiot she married.
it would.
it really, really would... but where does she think we were?
i told her you all got up early to clean out my garage, which you will be doing today.
ohh.
also, i hid all your adolescent crap around the side of the house, including the egg chair that you can keep, kenny.
it was enough just to watch you destroy... your precious nerd capsule.
i shall rebuild it, and it shall be stronger, faster, with a sunroof and a thing to pee in.
will, could you come here for a second?
look at my eye.
what happened?
uh, i have no idea...
but i think your body type can handle it.
__file_terminal__
hey, pay attention, fuckers...
i need you to cancel that thing today, the debate.
why?
because my sister's dead.
hey, why aren't you drinking?
son of a bitch, what's in this?
fuckers...
no angle;
a proposal.
what's the one thing you and i were always good at together?
ha!
a new dealership?
you're going to win it for me.
it's my new long-term plan.
relax foxley, i got this!
a campaign that has zero focus, no platform, and not a single female supporter?
this is serious, fitz!
chester, i'm leaving you!
motherfucker!
you faked your sister's death to get votes?
what do you have to say for yourself, mr. fitzpatrick?
my sister's alive!
it's a miracle!
oh, god...
oh god...
you wanna know what i believe?
chumps wait for miracles.
fitzpatricks get what they want by following the ten commandments...
there will be no other gods before me.
obviously.
never take the lord's name in vain.
unless it's justified.
jesus christ, sweet mother of fuck.
where's my lighter, larry!
don't worship false idols.
unless you're out of single malt.
god, i hate blended.
observe the lord's day.
fuck me, fitz.
oh, i observed it alright.
honor thy father.
don't kill -- intentionally.
then there's the one thing that no one gives a shit about so, who cares.
then there's the adultery thing
get him!
the stealing thing...
and, finally, my favorite commandment of all...
covet thy neighbour.
she's actually the neighbour's daughter.
but who's counting?
because when you live life right, good things just happen...
amen.
'ooo, we are fitzpatricks and we rise from the dead.'
there has not been one customer all day because of their blasphemy, cousin.
yes, the devil father fitzpatrick has found a most ingenious way out of our sales contract - starting his own religion.
and giving away free cars with every $5000 "donation".
i say bah!
we shall overcome, for we are ruptal.
when has religion ever stopped us before?
when the authorities put you on their no-fly list.
it is preposterous of them to think i could hijack a plane with a pair of nose hair clippers...
nose hair clippers!
go find out what's going on.
no.
i'll be at the dui- did you just say no?
i did.
why the fuck not?
because the election is imminent and we need to focus on shoring up votes.
that means hand shaking.
baby kissing.
last minute campaigning.
who gives a shit what you think?
i have faith in me and that's all that matters.
well, it's a good thing you have faith, because it's going to take a miracle for you to win this election.
i refer to my first response:
who gives a shit what you think.
the election is in the bag.
iris?
next!
c'mon, get out of here.
all right, c'mon, c'mon...
what's up?
it's my hip.
you are healed.
you didn't even touch me.
i said you're healed.
now go get your car.
pervert.
out!
she's the mother fucking messiah!
do what she says!
yeah.
i'm the messiah.
right, mommy?
and we're on a tight fucking schedule!
let's go!
next!
all right, sweet cheeks, what's up?
iris?
hi...
how did you find me?
actually...
i'm here for the miracle.
it seemed too good to be true but i had to see for myself.
it is a miracle, iris...
us running into each other like this.
i could escort you to the tent, if you want.
and then maybe we can go for ice cream.
you and me?
like, a date?
oh, you don't need to call it that.
unless you want to.
which is fine.
or not.
is it fine?
iris, i don't think it's an accident you wandered onto this lot.
all these weeks, you and me and the specter of the deceased creatures who we both once loved.
it's fate, iris.
our very own miracle!
no, larry.
it isn't.
it isn't that at all.
♪ money, money, money ♪
tax free profit.
hallefuckinglujah.
we always were great business partners, lainey.
shitty parents.
nightmare marriage.
but goddamn geniuses when it came to pushing tin.
i am the messiah!
is it too much to ask for a soda and a clean goddamn dressing room?
we have to get the little douchebag under control.
jesus freaks like their shit clean.
a church?
you fucking kidding me?
what's he doing here?
a freak show i could understand.
come see the bearded lady.
i told you i had electrolysis!
now fuck off!
this is my miracle!
daddy!
i want him out of here now!
these suckers wouldn't be here if it wasn't for me.
it was my idea to kill her in the first place!
you'll all be fucking sorry when i win the election and shut this shit show down!
better start praying for a miracle, fucker.
because i'm telling everyone to vote for chester vince!
before or after you shave?
hey, watch the suit!
you need a time out, mister.
me?
she started it!
she's always ruining my shit!
breaking my toys!
now my campaign!
hit the bricks!
and you can tell those curry packers across the road
ken fitzpatrick is back.
and elaine fitzpatrick.
yeah, her too.
fuck you -- all of you!
bye-bye, richard!
divide and conquer.
i deal with joan of bark here.
you make sure numb-nuts doesn't fuck up my scam.
our scam.
that's what i said.
eat my scraps, asshole!
i need more fucking ketchup!
squirt bottle!
out of the trough, legs.
we need to shore up votes.
and fast.
oh, look who's decided to wake up and give a shit.
after last week's little debacle, you still think we have a shot?
i don't need a shot.
i'm the fucking pistol.
now move!
don't talk to me like i'm one of your minions.
i busted my ass for this campaign and look what it got me.
fine.
put the wings on my tab.
fuck you.
i am responsible for my own failed career, my bad choice of business partner, my stress eating.
wow.
melody gray was right about you.
what did she say?
you tell me, cankles.
i was big boned and i had a note to get out of that fitness test.
i am not a quitter.
fine.
but i'm doing this for me.
not you.
me.
any day now.
scotch.
vodka.
better make it a triple, old lady, because after i get through with you and molly mormon, you're gonna need it.
you always were a poor loser.
says the woman who rigged 'pin the tail on the donkey' at my birthday party so she could fuck the winner's old man.
i should be thanking you, actually.
you and your sister are finally paying off.
the only reason we had you shit dispensers was so we could make money.
you mean that bullshit angle ken's playing?
that's short term.
i get into office, you can make some real coin.
you really think you're going to win.
better fucking believe it.
know what i believe?
you don't have a shot in hell.
ken's going to fuck you over just like he always does.
you can't con a conner, kid.
just stay out of our way.
you're gonna vote for me, right, charlie?
you gonna find another place to drink?
vote for fitz!
stop it.
he's not even worth it.
she loves me not.
she still loves me not.
oh, fuck.
don't you have somewhere else to be?
i am upset.
and you should eat something first.
you'll need your strength for what lies ahead.
women looking for miracles, and men unable to give them.
when will you learn, larry.
pussies don't get pussy.
love is a battlefield, richard.
and this soldier has lost the war.
nu uh.
the battle is over when i say it's over.
you really think i have a chance with iris?
fuck iris.
i prefer the term "go for ice cream".
that's it...
steal support...
win votes...
blow shit up...
i never said any of that.
then i'll say it for you, rumpcrunch.
two words -- mother fucking holy war.
that's four words.
yeah.
it worked in iraq.
it worked in afghanistan.
and tomorrow, it's gonna work for me.
get your jihadist asses out here!
who is dead now?
or perhaps you wish to subject us to more racial stereotypes.
what the fuck, josh?
no.
i just need you to help me blow up a church.
wicked.
on it, buddy.
what about our holy oath to not help him with his plans anymore?
oh right.
solidarity, cousin.
you are no cousin of mine.
look, you don't like me, and i sure as hell don't like you.
but there's a bigger threat out there.
godzilla.
no, my family is carpet bombing your customers and my voters.
we've got to take them down.
two birds.
one bomb.
sales have declined.
joining forces with our mortal enemy may be the solution we need.
this is the soviets all over again...
i am not going on that stage until i get a new pillow, lip balm, and my theater tickets.
and by the way, why are there no towels in my change room?
i can't work under these conditions....
what a fucking prima donna.
she gets that from you!
divide and conquer, dipshit.
what the fuck have you been doing all day?
do you know how long it takes to adjust the lighting so people don't think she's the fucking antichrist?
you take care of the little slut bucket.
hello?
i'm trying to keep cock snot's sticky little fingers out of our pot.
complaining about our demon spawn.
this is so "us".
don't worry about this shit, lainey.
this shit will work itself out.
we're winners, you and me.
and we're back in the green.
and by the way...
don't get me started about the audience.
who vets these people?
burn, infidel!
how did all the fatties end up down front?
what kind of retard forgets to light a molotov cocktail?
you idiot!
where did you go to terrorist school?
hey!
he didn't.
i do have a bachelor in fine arts.
cut him some slack.
it's his first holy war.
as usual, i've got to do everything myself.
come one, come all!
to see the real miracle!
why worship the resurrected, when you can worship, and vote for, the resurrector!
and get free cars.
for a reasonable monetary donation.
that snakey fuck.
see the man responsible for raising the bearded lady from the dead!
fuck you!
i do not have a beard!
yes you do!
come back and worship my daughter!
you want to believe in something?
i'll tell you what to believe in
richard fitzpatrick for city council!
no!
there shall be no other gods except me!
especially not my stupid brother!
come on, you guys!
this is dealing with him?
you always were too soft on these kids.
don't worry, hot stuff - i got this.
you!
no, dear god.
no.
please just make it quick.
relax.
my shithead kid is messing up my scam with my other shithead kid.
you're the only one that can talk sense into that ass baby.
i want you to go over there and do it now.
i can't help you.
i can't help anyone.
i can't even help myself.
what's with the pity party, fuck face?
it's no one.
just a sweet angel who took my heart in her delicate fingers, and then ravaged it like a polynesian cannibal.
and i don't even know why.
i'll tell you why.
you're a spineless yes man to a dirtbag.
what woman wants that?
you're right.
and you know what else?
i killed a bird.
no wonder iris finds me repulsive.
oh.
a dead bird.
that's the reason.
i know.
look, nancy-- it's larry.
look, nancy, grow a set.
it's time you took a stand.
call bullshit when it stinks.
yeah, it's my responsibility to show the public that richard isn't what he says he is... that there are no such things as miracles...
make it quick, slim jim.
i've got a fake church to salvage.
good talk.
vodka.
make it snappy.
my sister was dead.
and at her grave,
i asked the lord to return her.
for she was innocent.
unstable, yes, unattractive, yes, but she was innocent.
and i felt something surge through me as i touched my dead sister.
no!
it was the lord's power.
blessed be jesus, zombie maker.
we talked about this.
she's not a zombie.
it was the cannabis.
praised be to the blue eyed devil, fitz!
anyway, vote fitz, and when i'm in office,
i'll resurrect anyone and anything you desire.
are you sure about that?
yes, that's why all these good people are here today.
am i right?
then resurrect this- -titmouse.
that's right!
a dead bird.
surely no match for the resurrector.
i'm calling bull... poop that smells, mister.
what the fuck are you doing?
taking a stand and telling everyone here that he faked his own sister's death.
hey, where you going?
come back!
what happened, richard?
what happened to the last honest man?
ice cream!
problem solved, baby...
it's not what it looks like.
fuck, lainey.
the gay mafia's after me.
i need this cash.
i can't go find some rich fuck like you.
all i got is my sparkling personality and this scam.
and me.
i wasn't going to take you.
but i rose from the dead!
you said this was our thing.
you said if i helped hide this from mom
the little shit was right about you!
fuck.
lainey!
go get me a scotch.
fuck you.
all of you.
from this moment forward, i am emancipating myself from this family!
now that's a fucking miracle.
you think i'm going to roll over for you, chester?
you think i don't know that leadership requires sacrifice?
you think i wouldn't be able to bury people alive to ensure the survival of my country?
i know that sometimes you have to chop someone's head off!
i'm just as tough as idi amin.
i'm just as tough as any of those motherfuckers!
ow... ow...
it's over for good this time, roger.
may i call you roger?
iris
don't speak.
i'm sorry i ran away before.
things are complicated.
but so what, right?
tell that to the titmouse.
i would like to go for ice cream with you.
so much ice cream.
i would like to go for ice cream with you more than you could ever imagine.
i told richard miracles don't happen but this is a miracle.
oh, iris
there is just one thing i need to do.
i know, larry.
would you just...
thanks.
this is melody gray reporting live outside city hall.
exit polls show chester vince with a commanding lead.
no doubt this is in response to this reporter's shocking exposé of local lothario and rumored polygamist cult leader,
richard fitzpatrick.
the dream is dead, fitz.
josh, how many times do i have to tell you, a bookstore is not a strip club.
larry paid me to bring you here.
in coffee.
i got nothing to say to that backstabber.
there are miracles, richard.
there are.
iris came back to me.
good.
that makes up for the shit storm you turned my life into.
i know you're upset.
and, as your conscience,
i feel you deserve one last shot.
and i deserve a coffee.
we may be down in the polls.
broke.
and have lost the holy war.
but there is one thing you have not tried.
the pumpkin scones.
they're amazing.
prayer.
fuck off, larry.
all that faith crap was just bullshit.
since you're banned from... every church in town,
i thought we could try the theology section.
still holy and thirty percent off.
please richard, one little prayer.
how can it hurt?
i'll buy you a coffee.
fine.
tall half skinny one percent extra hot split quad shot half sweet caramel macchiato.
no whip.
okay, whip.
chocolate sprinkles?
i'm not gay.
after all, how can this city be expected to trust a councillor who can't even make good on a promise to resurrect a dead bird?
and with the polls about to close, this reporter is confident in declaring chester vince the winner.
we'll see about that.
hey, god.
it's me, fitz.
i need to speak to frank.
uh...hey, frank.
i don't know if you're listening, but how you doin'?
hope that bus crash with the cheerleaders last week spiced the party up a bit, know what i mean?
fuck, i don't know what i mean.
fuck, frank.
a guy needs a break once in a while, you know?
cold streak's gotta end.
i'm a good guy...
look, here's the thing.
i'm having a kid.
...and i don't want the little fucker to think i'm a loser like my old man.
i got to win this fucking election.
throw me a bone, will ya, frank?
fitz?
oh, and...
if you could you make sure he's got a decent head of hair.
no tail.
amen.
good enough.
this is melody gray reporting live outside city hall.
and i am getting the official announcement now...
you've got to be fucking kidding me.
richard fitzpatrick won?
ha ha!
that's right, fuckers!
fitz won!
and i won it for him!
woo hoo!
suck it, coverton!
suck it hard!
yeah!
__file_terminal__
hey, pay attention, fuckers...
i need you to cancel that thing today, the debate.
why?
because my sister's dead.
hey, why aren't you drinking?
son of a bitch, what's in this?
fuckers...
no angle;
a proposal.
what's the one thing you and i were always good at together?
ha!
a new dealership?
you're going to win it for me.
it's my new long-term plan.
relax foxley, i got this!
a campaign that has zero focus, no platform, and not a single female supporter?
this is serious, fitz!
chester, i'm leaving you!
motherfucker!
you faked your sister's death to get votes?
what do you have to say for yourself, mr. fitzpatrick?
my sister's alive!
it's a miracle!
[organ music throughout]
oh, god...
oh god...
you wanna know what i believe?
chumps wait for miracles.
fitzpatricks get what they want by following the ten commandments...
there will be no other gods before me.
obviously.
never take the lord's name in vain.
unless it's justified.
jesus christ, sweet mother of fuck.
where's my lighter, larry!
don't worship false idols.
unless you're out of single malt.
god, i hate blended.
[moaning]
observe the lord's day.
fuck me, fitz.
oh, i observed it alright.
honor thy father.
don't kill -- intentionally.
then there's the one thing that no one gives a shit about so, who cares.
then there's the adultery thing
get him!
the stealing thing...
and, finally, my favorite commandment of all...
covet thy neighbour.
she's actually the neighbour's daughter.
but who's counting?
because when you live life right, good things just happen... [grunting] [splash]
amen.
[flushing] [lively gospel music]
'ooo, we are fitzpatricks and we rise from the dead.'
there has not been one customer all day because of their blasphemy, cousin.
yes, the devil father fitzpatrick has found a most ingenious way out of our sales contract - starting his own religion.
and giving away free cars with every $5000 "donation".
i say bah!
we shall overcome, for we are ruptal.
when has religion ever stopped us before?
when the authorities put you on their no-fly list.
it is preposterous of them to think i could hijack a plane with a pair of nose hair clippers...
nose hair clippers!
go find out what's going on.
no.
i'll be at the dui- did you just say no?
i did.
why the fuck not?
because the election is imminent and we need to focus on shoring up votes.
that means hand shaking.
baby kissing.
last minute campaigning.
who gives a shit what you think?
i have faith in me and that's all that matters.
well, it's a good thing you have faith, because it's going to take a miracle for you to win this election.
i refer to my first response:
who gives a shit what you think.
the election is in the bag.
iris?
[heavenly music]
next!
c'mon, get out of here.
all right, c'mon, c'mon...
what's up?
it's my hip.
[gibberish sounds]
you are healed.
you didn't even touch me.
i said you're healed.
now go get your car.
pervert.
out!
she's the mother fucking messiah!
do what she says!
yeah.
i'm the messiah.
right, mommy?
and we're on a tight fucking schedule!
let's go!
next!
all right, sweet cheeks, what's up?
iris?
hi...
how did you find me?
actually...
i'm here for the miracle.
it seemed too good to be true but i had to see for myself.
it is a miracle, iris...
us running into each other like this.
i could escort you to the tent, if you want.
and then maybe we can go for ice cream.
you and me?
like, a date?
oh, you don't need to call it that.
unless you want to.
which is fine.
or not.
is it fine?
iris, i don't think it's an accident you wandered onto this lot.
all these weeks, you and me and the specter of the deceased creatures who we both once loved.
it's fate, iris.
our very own miracle!
no, larry.
it isn't.
it isn't that at all.
♪ money, money, money ♪
tax free profit.
hallefuckinglujah.
we always were great business partners, lainey.
shitty parents.
nightmare marriage.
but goddamn geniuses when it came to pushing tin.
i am the messiah!
is it too much to ask for a soda and a clean goddamn dressing room?
we have to get the little douchebag under control.
jesus freaks like their shit clean.
a church?
you fucking kidding me?
what's he doing here?
a freak show i could understand.
come see the bearded lady.
i told you i had electrolysis!
now fuck off!
this is my miracle!
daddy!
i want him out of here now!
these suckers wouldn't be here if it wasn't for me.
[laughing]
it was my idea to kill her in the first place!
you'll all be fucking sorry when i win the election and shut this shit show down!
better start praying for a miracle, fucker.
because i'm telling everyone to vote for chester vince!
before or after you shave?
hey, watch the suit!
you need a time out, mister.
me?
she started it!
she's always ruining my shit!
breaking my toys!
now my campaign!
hit the bricks!
and you can tell those curry packers across the road
ken fitzpatrick is back.
and elaine fitzpatrick.
yeah, her too.
fuck you -- all of you!
bye-bye, richard!
divide and conquer.
i deal with joan of bark here.
you make sure numb-nuts doesn't fuck up my scam.
our scam.
that's what i said.
eat my scraps, asshole!
i need more fucking ketchup!
squirt bottle!
out of the trough, legs.
we need to shore up votes.
and fast.
oh, look who's decided to wake up and give a shit.
after last week's little debacle, you still think we have a shot?
i don't need a shot.
i'm the fucking pistol.
now move!
don't talk to me like i'm one of your minions.
i busted my ass for this campaign and look what it got me.
fine.
put the wings on my tab.
fuck you.
i am responsible for my own failed career, my bad choice of business partner, my stress eating.
wow.
melody gray was right about you.
what did she say?
you tell me, cankles.
i was big boned and i had a note to get out of that fitness test.
i am not a quitter.
fine.
but i'm doing this for me.
not you.
me.
any day now.
scotch.
vodka.
better make it a triple, old lady, because after i get through with you and molly mormon, you're gonna need it.
you always were a poor loser.
says the woman who rigged 'pin the tail on the donkey' at my birthday party so she could fuck the winner's old man.
i should be thanking you, actually.
you and your sister are finally paying off.
the only reason we had you shit dispensers was so we could make money.
you mean that bullshit angle ken's playing?
that's short term.
i get into office, you can make some real coin.
you really think you're going to win.
better fucking believe it.
know what i believe?
you don't have a shot in hell.
ken's going to fuck you over just like he always does.
you can't con a conner, kid.
just stay out of our way.
you're gonna vote for me, right, charlie?
you gonna find another place to drink?
[knocking] vote for fitz!
[grunting]
stop it.
he's not even worth it.
she loves me not.
she still loves me not.
oh, fuck.
don't you have somewhere else to be?
i am upset.
and you should eat something first.
you'll need your strength for what lies ahead.
women looking for miracles, and men unable to give them.
when will you learn, larry.
pussies don't get pussy.
love is a battlefield, richard.
and this soldier has lost the war.
nu uh.
the battle is over when i say it's over.
you really think i have a chance with iris?
fuck iris.
i prefer the term "go for ice cream".
that's it...
steal support...
win votes...
blow shit up...
i never said any of that.
then i'll say it for you, rumpcrunch.
two words -- mother fucking holy war.
that's four words.
yeah.
it worked in iraq.
it worked in afghanistan.
and tomorrow, it's gonna work for me.
get your jihadist asses out here!
who is dead now?
or perhaps you wish to subject us to more racial stereotypes.
what the fuck, josh?
no.
i just need you to help me blow up a church.
wicked.
on it, buddy.
what about our holy oath to not help him with his plans anymore?
oh right.
solidarity, cousin.
you are no cousin of mine.
look, you don't like me, and i sure as hell don't like you.
but there's a bigger threat out there.
godzilla.
no, my family is carpet bombing your customers and my voters.
we've got to take them down.
two birds.
one bomb.
sales have declined.
joining forces with our mortal enemy may be the solution we need.
this is the soviets all over again...
i am not going on that stage until i get a new pillow, lip balm, and my theater tickets.
and by the way, why are there no towels in my change room?
i can't work under these conditions....
what a fucking prima donna.
she gets that from you!
divide and conquer, dipshit.
what the fuck have you been doing all day?
do you know how long it takes to adjust the lighting so people don't think she's the fucking antichrist?
you take care of the little slut bucket.
hello?
i'm trying to keep cock snot's sticky little fingers out of our pot.
complaining about our demon spawn.
this is so "us".
[laughs]
don't worry about this shit, lainey.
this shit will work itself out.
we're winners, you and me.
and we're back in the green.
and by the way...
don't get me started about the audience.
who vets these people?
burn, infidel!
how did all the fatties end up down front?
what kind of retard forgets to light a molotov cocktail?
you idiot!
where did you go to terrorist school?
hey!
he didn't.
i do have a bachelor in fine arts.
cut him some slack.
it's his first holy war.
as usual, i've got to do everything myself.
come one, come all!
to see the real miracle!
why worship the resurrected, when you can worship, and vote for, the resurrector!
and get free cars.
for a reasonable monetary donation.
that snakey fuck.
see the man responsible for raising the bearded lady from the dead!
fuck you!
i do not have a beard!
yes you do!
come back and worship my daughter!
you want to believe in something?
i'll tell you what to believe in
richard fitzpatrick for city council!
no!
there shall be no other gods except me!
especially not my stupid brother!
come on, you guys!
this is dealing with him?
you always were too soft on these kids.
don't worry, hot stuff - i got this.
you!
no, dear god.
no.
please just make it quick.
relax.
my shithead kid is messing up my scam with my other shithead kid.
you're the only one that can talk sense into that ass baby.
i want you to go over there and do it now.
i can't help you.
i can't help anyone.
i can't even help myself.
what's with the pity party, fuck face?
it's no one.
just a sweet angel who took my heart in her delicate fingers, and then ravaged it like a polynesian cannibal.
and i don't even know why.
i'll tell you why.
you're a spineless yes man to a dirtbag.
what woman wants that?
you're right.
and you know what else?
[whispers] i killed a bird.
no wonder iris finds me repulsive.
oh.
a dead bird.
that's the reason.
i know.
look, nancy-- it's larry.
look, nancy, grow a set.
it's time you took a stand.
call bullshit when it stinks.
yeah, it's my responsibility to show the public that richard isn't what he says he is... that there are no such things as miracles...
make it quick, slim jim.
i've got a fake church to salvage.
good talk.
vodka.
make it snappy.
my sister was dead.
and at her grave,
i asked the lord to return her.
for she was innocent.
unstable, yes, unattractive, yes, but she was innocent.
and i felt something surge through me as i touched my dead sister.
[audience groaning]
no!
it was the lord's power.
blessed be jesus, zombie maker.
we talked about this.
she's not a zombie.
it was the cannabis.
praised be to the blue eyed devil, fitz!
anyway, vote fitz, and when i'm in office,
i'll resurrect anyone and anything you desire.
are you sure about that?
yes, that's why all these good people are here today.
am i right?
then resurrect this- -titmouse.
that's right!
a dead bird.
surely no match for the resurrector.
i'm calling bull... poop that smells, mister.
what the fuck are you doing?
taking a stand and telling everyone here that he faked his own sister's death.
[gasps]
hey, where you going?
come back!
what happened, richard?
what happened to the last honest man?
[gasp] ice cream!
[♪]
ice cream!
problem solved, baby...
it's not what it looks like.
fuck, lainey.
the gay mafia's after me.
i need this cash.
i can't go find some rich fuck like you.
all i got is my sparkling personality and this scam.
and me.
i wasn't going to take you.
but i rose from the dead!
you said this was our thing.
you said if i helped hide this from mom
the little shit was right about you!
fuck.
lainey!
go get me a scotch.
fuck you.
all of you.
from this moment forward, i am emancipating myself from this family!
now that's a fucking miracle.
[humming happily]
♪ [music playing] ♪
you think i'm going to roll over for you, chester?
you think i don't know that leadership requires sacrifice?
you think i wouldn't be able to bury people alive to ensure the survival of my country?
i know that sometimes you have to chop someone's head off!
i'm just as tough as idi amin.
i'm just as tough as any of those motherfuckers!
[crying] [crying]
ow... ow... [sigh]
it's over for good this time, roger.
may i call you roger?
iris
don't speak.
i'm sorry i ran away before.
things are complicated.
but so what, right?
tell that to the titmouse.
i would like to go for ice cream with you.
so much ice cream.
i would like to go for ice cream with you more than you could ever imagine.
i told richard miracles don't happen but this is a miracle.
oh, iris
there is just one thing i need to do.
i know, larry.
would you just...
thanks.
this is melody gray reporting live outside city hall.
exit polls show chester vince with a commanding lead.
no doubt this is in response to this reporter's shocking exposé of local lothario and rumored polygamist cult leader,
richard fitzpatrick.
the dream is dead, fitz.
josh, how many times do i have to tell you, a bookstore is not a strip club.
larry paid me to bring you here.
in coffee.
i got nothing to say to that backstabber.
there are miracles, richard.
there are.
iris came back to me.
good.
that makes up for the shit storm you turned my life into.
i know you're upset.
and, as your conscience,
i feel you deserve one last shot.
and i deserve a coffee.
we may be down in the polls.
broke.
and have lost the holy war.
but there is one thing you have not tried.
the pumpkin scones.
they're amazing.
prayer.
fuck off, larry.
all that faith crap was just bullshit.
since you're banned from... every church in town,
i thought we could try the theology section.
still holy and thirty percent off.
please richard, one little prayer.
how can it hurt?
i'll buy you a coffee.
fine.
tall half skinny one percent extra hot split quad shot half sweet caramel macchiato.
no whip.
okay, whip.
chocolate sprinkles?
i'm not gay.
after all, how can this city be expected to trust a councillor who can't even make good on a promise to resurrect a dead bird?
and with the polls about to close, this reporter is confident in declaring chester vince the winner.
we'll see about that.
hey, god.
it's me, fitz.
i need to speak to frank.
uh...hey, frank.
i don't know if you're listening, but how you doin'?
hope that bus crash with the cheerleaders last week spiced the party up a bit, know what i mean?
fuck, i don't know what i mean.
fuck, frank.
a guy needs a break once in a while, you know?
cold streak's gotta end.
i'm a good guy...
look, here's the thing.
i'm having a kid.
...and i don't want the little fucker to think i'm a loser like my old man.
i got to win this fucking election.
throw me a bone, will ya, frank?
fitz?
oh, and...
if you could you make sure he's got a decent head of hair.
no tail.
amen.
good enough.
this is melody gray reporting live outside city hall.
and i am getting the official announcement now...
you've got to be fucking kidding me.
richard fitzpatrick won?
ha ha!
that's right, fuckers!
fitz won!
and i won it for him!
woo hoo!
suck it, coverton!
suck it hard!
yeah!
__file_terminal__
hey, pay attention, fuckers.
i'm riding this honesty bullshit all the way to city hall.
if you're so honest, then where have you been the last 25 years... dad?
dot's on the way to the clinic with your toothbrush, and your... semen sample.
you do have one thing in common... you both hate your biological fathers.
so...
oh, genetic compatibility testing.
you've got to give me something to take the edge off.
i can't stand the sight of her.
can't stand the sight of who, mr. fitzpatrick?
who the fuck do you think i mean, you quack?
can't.
sorry.
alone.
what do you want from me?
what do you want?
destroy that bitch natalie's research and level the playing field.
where did the baboon go?
he's hiv positive!
he's dying!
it's up to you, josh.
lure that little fucker out here with your ape-like ass.
go for the fruit!
please go for the fruit!
i never want to see you again.
any of you motherfuckers.
great news!
you're not the father.
let the press know, will ya?
i got shit to do.
you want to get ahead in the world, it pays to inspire a little sympathy.
new girl.
my lucky day.
the lost wallet routine?
really?
step one:
be pathetic.
forgot my wallet one time and i'm branded for life.
i guess it's also my fault i was mugged.
if you call getting smashed in the back of the head with a two-by-four a mugging.
that's terrible.
not as terrible as finding out my daughter's sleeping with the man who put me in the hospital.
or having my kidney stolen while i was unconscious.
or learning that my fiancee ran off with her ex on our wedding day.
you poor, poor man.
and now i can't work anymore.
my memory's shot.
i forget things all the time... like my wallet... and i've lost the ability to do math so i can't even figure out your tip!
fuck!
step two: reject the first offer for help.
it's on the house.
no, i don't want your sympathy.
i...
i just want my life back.
don't worry.
she'll step up to the plate.
because human nature doesn't make you act compassionate and shit.
ego does.
i know how to cheer you up.
but if blowing me in the alley makes her feel superior, who am i to judge?
one more thing.
can i count on your vote in the upcoming municipal election?
see this, nut-crunch?
this is how you wake someone up.
i can't condone scotch this early in the day.
so many empty calories.
shut up, larry.
we're celebrating.
we've jumped ahead 26 points in the polls.
fucking a!
yet still two points behind chester.
if you want to develop a real lead, we need to get you ready for today's debate.
yeah, public speaking isn't really my bag.
you wanna build on this momentum?
play the sympathy card.
make these hillbilly cousin fuckers feel bad for good old fitzy.
that'll crush chester, not some fucking debate.
yeah.
some kind of illness.
something crippling.
yeah.
but not the face.
we can't manufacture sympathy.
you're the last honest man!
don't you ever get tired of being the homosexual jiminy cricket?
iris says insults are a sign of weakness.
they make talking blow-up dolls?
you're just jealous.
i can have any man i want.
anytime i want.
not that you understand the complexity of female-male relationships...
or anything.
we are not cancelling this debate and that's final.
it would be the death of this campaign.
larry...
you're absolutely right.
i am?
he is?
and i need you to get my black suit from the cleaners.
you got it, councillor.
you better sober up if you're going to go through with this.
this is richard fitzpatrick.
i have to cancel that thing today... the debate.
why?
because my sister's dead.
genius.
how did she die?
horribly.
thank you.
sir.
thank you very much.
we better find that bitch.
once again, a politician hides behind liberal buzzwords like "mental illness" and "family tragedy".
what the fuck?
this time, it's freshman candidate richard fitzpatrick dropping out of today's debate
to mourn" the alleged suicide of his sister meghan.
what the fuck?
inevitable?
probably.
sad?
not particularly.
but one thing is certain:
richard fitzpatrick owes the people of coverton one debate.
oh.
and rest in peace, meghan.
what the fuck?
this is melody gray, reporting.
that's terrible.
i know.
fitzpatrick's popularity is going to skyrocket.
okay.
thinking caps on.
what trumps "dead sister?
like deaf sister.
or who do we know with aids?
chester, i can't believe we're having this conversation.
i'm not saying anyone has to die.
how far along are we again?
chester!
but everyone loves premature babies.
they're little bundles of hope.
real little fighters.
i feel like i can't say anything to you these days!
yeah.
black...
red...
where is my leaking haemorrhoid of a brother?
haven't seen him.
he's too busy running around being big shot politician to hang out with his old buddy josh.
cry me a fucking river.
apparently i'm dead.
it was all over the news.
do i look dead to you?
do i?
you kinda smell dead.
asshole.
tell dick i'm looking for him.
no.
don't tell him.
i'll find him myself.
so if you're not dead...
you must be the undead.
fucking stoner.
joint!
oh i've missed you so much.
how many sisters have to die before a man can get a drink around here?
richard, i came as soon as i heard the news.
i'm so sorry.
all right, you overgrown abortion.
what the fuck did you do?
your daughter is dead, and that's your response?
she's not dead, you little shit.
elaine?
look who decided to drop in.
if there was ever a time to set your anger aside, that time is now.
go stick your dick in a toaster.
i can smell a con a mile off... and i want my cut.
of course you do.
because that's all you care about.
are you still harping on that abandoned child shtick?
you've had - what?
twenty years to get over it.
more like twenty-nine years, mom.
see?
plenty of time!
you always were lazy.
so, how did she die?
you do it yourself?
uh... well.
i knew it was a con.
lazy and a bad liar.
and you wonder why i left.
how dare you?
your son is clearly shaken.
the medical examiner is calling it an... overdose.
downed a bottle of tranquilizers like it was candy.
meghan can't swallow pills.
she chokes like a cat on a hairball.
i always told her:
you'll never keep a husband with that gag reflex.
i don't know which is worse, the fact that you think i'm lying, or that you don't care that your own daughter is dead.
well, someone in this family has to give a shit about meghan.
i guess it's up to me to give that shit.
i give a shit.
the funeral is tuesday.
you can see for yourselves.
you buying that bullshit?
all you have to do is go away and pretend to be dead.
for how long?
a couple of days.
is that too much to fucking ask?
my family is so fucking selfish.
saul disappears with my son because i'm
an incompetent caregiver".
dad only wants me to be his front for his new dealership.
you tell people i'm dead for your stupid campaign and the only thing mom ever cared about was stupid cigarettes.
yeah, you're right.
throwing a funeral would be a bad idea.
all those people missing you.
talking about how great you are.
were.
you'd never do that.
yeah...
it was going to be a great funeral.
with...
like flowers?
lots of flowers.
a few flowers.
and a new dress?
fuck.
fine.
yes, a new dress.
it would teach everyone a lesson about taking me for granted.
and think of all that sympathy for you... and a certain freshman candidate who wants to shake up the status quo.
and everyone will be emotionally vulnerable.
who needs internet dating when you have funerals.
yeah - it would be great.
but what happens when everyone finds out i'm still alive?
by then i'll be in office and it's too late.
besides, politicians go back on their word all the time.
i am not a crook";
i didn't have sexual relations with that woman
it's no different from "i didn't know my sister wasn't really dead.
i want it to be open casket.
i want to be able to hear everyone crying and talking about how they miss me.
i want the coffin to be oak.
and it has to be lined with silk...
it would be easier to just kill her.
don't fucking tempt me.
and you can't hold it at the dui.
god, you are so fucking cheap.
the dealership?
really?
you couldn't at least rent a community center?
nobody would believe that i'd waste any more money on you than i'd have to.
i suppose...
but still...
i had to have my wedding here.
so many memories.
will you get in the fucking box before larry or somebody important sees that you're not dead?
here.
i wrote a poem for the eulogy.
it's going to make everyone so sad they'll puke.
i think the guest of honour deserves a glass of champagne.
champagne.
now i really am a princess.
a dead one.
but still a princess.
to me.
the bubbles tickle my nose.
hey, why aren't you drinking...
son of a bitch.
what's in this?
just a little something to ensure you stay still during the funeral.
not again.
mother... fuckers.
get her feet.
i did not approve this funeral.
he still owns 30 percent of the dealership.
at least we can take advantage of the heathen grief to sell the mazda.
you are exceedingly insensitive.
i guess that pile of shit with a pompadour was telling the truth.
hard to believe she's dead.
hard to believe she's quiet.
show some fucking respect.
a little late to give a shit, isn't it?
thank you for being here.
vote for fitz.
i appreciate the support.
show your support.
it means so much.
he needs you now more than ever.
very appreciated.
don't forget to vote.
look at them all feeling sorry for me.
black suits you.
could we have one conversation where you don't hit on me?
nope.
look, i'm really sorry about your sister.
she was...
she was so...
yeah.
anyway, when you get a minute, we need to talk.
richard...
yeah.
it's good to see you, i guess.
how are you holding up?
i'm gettin' through it guy.
and you are...
still trying to process the news.
i think i'm in denial.
i never thought this day would come.
yeah.
mmm.
well built.
no ring.
hair.
dibs.
keep it in your pants, red.
this is supposed to be a funeral.
look who's talking.
would it hurt you to shed a few tears?
fitzpatricks don't have tear ducts.
ask my doctor.
richard...
i'm here for you.
if you need anything.
i could use a hug.
you could?
yeah...
get the photographer.
it's tragedies like the loss of a loved one, even meghan, that lead to self-reflection, and personal growth.
richard fitzpatrick, get ready... it's coming for you.
got it, thanks.
ha!
ya!
josh...
whoa, man!
i am wondering if you can assist an emotional but not biological brother.
little busy here, buddy.
but do you have any more of that intoxicating herb?
meghan's death is affecting me more than i thought - because it is affecting me - and i need something to take the edge off.
you silly, naive little brown man.
this...
this is all you're gonna need.
take it!
you kill the brain and you kill the ghoul.
you got it?
it's go time buddy.
operation blackout.
it must have been a top secret government experiment.
the resurrection of the dead.
it's the only explanation.
zombies.
please, i don't have time for your immature foolishness.
i need to get high.
save the last bullet for yourself.
for yourself.
here you go.
almost fresh.
i'm looking for my smokes, dipshit.
champagne?
thanks, no.
i don't drink.
not anymore.
so what do you do?
i just want to be up front with you.
i haven't dated since my divorce.
oh...
i'll be gentle.
oh, my little girl.
my poor little princess.
it is so odd to see her without her mouth moving.
she looks like a ventriloquist doll.
i have decided i will miss her.
she was a tigress in bed.
yes, a gentle tigress.
with an insatiable appetite.
an insatiable appetite for cuddling...
i will give you a moment.
allahu akbar!
zombie!
so, you enjoying the funeral?
cut the small talk, toots.
we both know why you're here.
i seriously doubt you have any clue.
you signed my nomination form.
been following me around like a lost puppy.
admit it, you want me to win.
fitz, i am here to pay my respects.
to something that's been on my mind for the last...
30 weeks now.
do you get me?
okay, fitz... you're the... you are the...
i'm the what?
you're the bravest man i know to push on with the election campaign despite this tragedy.
chester?
what the hell?
although, none of us are strangers to tragedy.
this is low.
even for you.
how dare you mock my acute case of guillain-barré syndrome?
a disease i probably picked up volunteering at the soup kitchen.
rosanne barr syndrome my ass.
it's a good thing he brought that wheelchair.
he's going to need it.
richard, no.
you need to grieve.
i'll handle this.
trying to exploit our sympathy for his own petty political gain.
the nerve...
couldn't agree more.
where did those goddamn cigarettes go?
cut the act.
this is my last one.
sure it is.
one thing the little retard was always good for.
going to the store for smokes.
that's because she stole the change.
that crafty little bitch.
she must have got it from her mother.
all right, one-nut.
what's your angle?
i've seen the way you've been eyeball fucking me all day.
no angle.
a proposal.
forget it.
i don't want to park my shoes under your bed.
we both know we're like oil and whatever that shit is that oil won't mix with.
then what?
what's the one thing we were always good at together?
rape fantasies.
and slinging tin.
a new dealership?
you and me?
just like the old days.
well, i'd consider it.
as soon as you apologize.
for what?
let's start with our whole fucking marriage and take it from there.
i knew you'd be a cock crunching shrew about this.
fuck that.
a fitzpatrick never apologizes.
i'm sorry, but that's just the way it is.
then we've got nothing left to talk about.
fuck.
the mental health apple never falls far from the tree.
so, if his sister killed herself, who's to say fitzpatrick isn't just as unstable.
okay...
so you're saying we can't risk a madman on city council.
exactly.
then just say it.
we... can't risk a madman on city council.
beautiful.
fascinating.
would you excuse us for a moment?
this is off the record.
of course.
i think i have proven
i will tolerate many things, chester vince.
many, many things.
but co-opting this family's funeral to further your political aspirations?
not one of them.
oh really?
i asked around the police station, and no one remembers a 911 call for a suicide.
how dare you defile the memory of richard's dear sister.
okay!
it's time to go.
oh, no, no!
you're not going anywhere.
not until that casket is in the ground and you apologize for doubting the deep feelings of sadness this family is experiencing right now.
it's a free country, larry.
let them go.
no, richard.
chester vince accused you of staging this whole funeral to elicit voter sympathy.
we're going to make him eat those words.
at the graveyard when we bury meghan fitzpatrick.
i can't wait.
all right, let's go.
nice work, larry.
i've always got your back, buddy.
oh, you've got a
get your fuckin' hands off me.
trouble?
depends.
how much air do you think this coffin holds?
don't worry.
she'll wake up long before the air runs out.
fuck!
hey everyone, could we hurry the fuck up to the graveyard?
this corpse isn't gonna bury itself.
ha!
okay, here we go, let's go.
let's go, guys...
and it sure as shit ain't gonna rise.
meghan wrote this before she died.
fuck.
dear richard, i'll make this brief.
i just want to take a second to say how wonderful it is that you all turned out to support my brother.
it's a touching gesture in a time of need, and when he is elected
i've got something to say.
son of a bitch, can't it wait?
fuck off.
elaine.
we've had our ups and downs.
but if there's one person i want in my corner, it's you.
oh, for fuck's sake.
so if it takes an apology to get you back in business with me, then elaine
richard, here it comes... emotional growth...
i am sorry.
yeah, i'm not feeling it.
i'm sorry you're a filthy lying whore!
and there it goes.
you know what i've been through?
i can't believe you'd stoop so low.
i have an election to win.
and i need your help.
try thinking about someone besides yourself for a change.
that's all i've been doing for the last 30 weeks.
you could have fooled me.
oh, really?
watch me.
now, if i may continue...
fitz!
chester, i'm leaving you!
and i'm sorry for your loss.
ali-bear?
wait!
you faked an illness to get sympathy?
what kind of monster would do that?
why is it so dark in here?
fitz!
hurry up!
so, in conclusion, and in light of chester vince being retarded and not handicapped, vote fitz!
now let's get to the wake.
first round's on larry.
you motherfucker!
you never read my poem!
you're alive?
fucking right i am.
get mommy some smokes.
fuck you!
motherfucking assholes.
saul?
you brought a date to your ex-wife's fucking funeral?
you ruined my life.
you slept with her?
hey...
i drank a 3 into a 7 and woke up married, okay?
you, get away from him!
die, zombie fiend.
zombie!
she must die!
again.
you shot me!
oh my god!
try again!
what does a woman have to do around here to get a cigarette?
are you in?
fine.
fuck it!
you faked your sister's death to get votes?
oh, richard.
what do you have to say for yourself, mr. fitzpatrick?
my sister's alive.
it's... a miracle!
__file_terminal__
hey!
pay attention, fuckers...
i'm a councilman now!
retract that titmouse law;
i've got a bar to open.
all new legislation is to be tabled on a first-come, first-served basis.
well, how long's that gonna take?
three years, give or take.
you're the one who wanted the job,
i merely got it for you.
and that's why you're fired.
to larry, re:
your ass.
ass...
it's fired too.
iris, you're a stripper?
i will never forgive you for this.
the league of sober entrepreneurs lobbies government to destroy that degenerate dickhead,
richard fitzpatrick.
what the fuck?
the fuck, mr. fitzpatrick, is prohibition.
coverton is a dry town, richard.
the summerwind will never open.
you happy now, larry?
you've destroyed my dream and my life.
i don't need a fucking conscience, and i never will!
with the mayor's life hanging by a thread, governance in coverton falls to his deputy-mayor...
richard fitzpatrick.
god help us all.
ring a ding ding.
i, richard fitzpatrick...
i, richard fitzpatrick do solemnly swear do solemnly swear...
once upon a time, a handsome prince was enslaved by three trolls.
the first troll was an angry troll.
he did whatever he could to make the handsome prince miserable.
the second troll was a pushy troll.
she tried to make the handsome prince do whatever she wanted.
the third troll was a crazy troll.
trying to drag the handsome prince down with him.
the trolls worked the prince day and night.
but they never broke his spirit, because he was so...
fuckin' awesome.
don't change the words.
so help me, god.
what she said.
you are now acting mayor of coverton.
and we are screwed.
congratulations, mr. mayor.
what are you going to do now?
whatever the fuck i want.
finally, the handsome prince escaped to his kingdom and took his rightful place as king.
and they lived happily ever after.
ring a ding ding, baby.
nice work, kid.
we play this right, we can milk this cash cow for a long time.
prohibition could be the best thing that ever happened to us.
what's all this "us" bullshit?
what's all this "bullshit" bullshit?
you did exactly two things to help me get here:
jack and shit.
you ungrateful little prick.
you wouldn't be in the fucking mayor's office if it wasn't for me.
you wouldn't be on this fucking planet!
new by-law.
ken fitzpatrick can never get another car dealer's license...
no...
ken fitzpatrick can never have another business license.
ever.
you can't do that!
just watch me.
emergency powers, old man.
the people of coverton have entrusted me to do a job;
i intend to see it through.
josh!
this meeting's over.
what the fuck?
let's go, old man.
get your fucking hands off me.
you think some by-law is going to stop me?
i'm ken fucking fitzpatrick.
nobody tells me what to do!
watch the carpet.
mother fucker!
let's go.
the mayor's exiting the building.
the mayor's walking down the stairs.
richard!
i've been trying to get in to speak to you all day.
stand down, citizen.
you stand down!
richard, you'll never be a wholly realized person unless your summerwind dream becomes a reality.
you have the power now...
we're still going to make it happen, right?
look around, dipshit.
i've moved on to bigger and better things.
what could be bigger and better than the lounge you've been dreaming of opening your whole life?
how about world domination- ever heard of it?
you should see his evil headquarters, it's amazing.
last week, i was a guy who'd never paid a parking ticket in his life.
this week, i'm running a police state.
i can do whatever the fuck i want.
not if i can help it.
josh.
new by-law.
no larrys on city property.
copy that, sir.
richard, please wait...
you're asking for it, buddy.
asking for what
really, josh?
yep!
really!
a vodka soda just isn't the same without the vodka.
what are you doing?
you fought for prohibition.
to get fitz off council, cum-crust.
it wasn't a lifestyle choice.
i don't understand.
why won't richard just end prohibition and reopen his bar now that he has the power?
the real question is:
why do you still give a shit?
because richard and i are a team.
no, we're more than a team, we're connected.
i'm the yin to his yang.
the chocolate to his peanut butter...
the ass to his hole.
i'm going to give richard a dose of vitamin d.
that's right.
the "d" stands for dream.
just as soon as i get back in his good books and convince him he needs me.
you'd have a better chance convincing him that he loves man meat.
yeah, but what if...
what if we work together...
forget it.
i have a new plan.
and in this one, there's no larry's allowed.
same as my vagina.
tidy up for me, would ya?
vagina?
look it up, larry.
what do you mean the fire department's out of money?
then make people pay to put out fires.
christ, do i have to think of everything around here?
fuck.
busy night?
nothing i can't handle.
good.
then handle it from home.
i need you to paint the nursery.
we have a nursery?
yes.
and apparently paint fumes are bad for the baby.
along with sushi.
and wine.
and soft cheese.
i'll get josh right on it.
i'm happy your dream's come true, but this baby's going to come out and when it comes out and i need you to be there.
to catch it.
when i became a lawyer
i thought i'd be taking long lunches with nigerian warlords, parasailing off the alps, and taking my bonuses in blood diamonds...
fitz, we can't solve all our problems with sex.
maybe just one more time.
yeah...
don't answer...
no, don't...
answer it...
who is this?
what do you want?
this better not be bullshit.
fuck.
you're leaving?
not right now.
i made a promise to keep my constituents happy.
yeah!
mr. mayor...
allah does not welcome cowards.
we are desperate men.
and you go first.
come on.
greetings white she-devil.
and how are you today?
what are you two inbreds doing here?
you seem to be somewhat intelligent for a woman.
as such, we require your immediate cooperation.
what we are trying to ask is, would you mind taking a look at our books?
we are spending more than we are making.
but we are not spending.
it does not make sense.
someone is siphoning funds from your accounts.
aladdin's carpet!
who would do such a thing?
even money their last name is fitzpatrick.
you really should have changed the bank accounts when you bought the business.
amateurs.
of all their treacheries, this is their most treacherous.
what's the password?
cauterized hemorrhoid?
hi.
what the fuck do you want?
does this come in scotch?
never took you for a drunk.
two hundred a bottle.
it's not for me.
it's a gift for richard.
aww...
trouble in paradise?
we've drifted apart recently.
but knowing richard's love of all things distilled,
i thought this might get me a sit-down with him.
trust me, it's going to take a lot more than a bottle of hooch to impress that fetus fajita i call a son.
police!
this better not be a bullshit call.
what the fuck?
it's not my birthday.
your jerk-off son's new uniform policy.
hands up.
perimeter is secure.
why don't i get a gun?
because you're not a cop.
a little birdy told me about your bootlegging operation.
you stooley snitch.
why don't i get shorts?
hey, josh.
focus!
looking good, bud.
you touchy feely man bitch.
i know this seems like a betrayal, sir.
but, it's for the greater good.
richard needs me, but he needs to know that he needs me.
hey, do me a favor, toots.
arrest my old man.
let's see your hands, please.
i will get you for that.
i never thought i'd say this, but nice job, larry.
maybe you aren't totally fucking useless after all.
richard that is the nicest thing you've ever said to me.
and since you're in a charitable mood,
i would like to request a sit-down with you.
whatever, just get the booze.
wow.
this is amazing.
scotch, and a shirley temple for the lady.
the summerwind dream is alive and well.
you should be proud, buddy.
no thanks to you.
you want to help out around here?
there are going to be rules.
one:
keep your mouth shut.
two:
do what i say.
three:
keep your mouth shut.
got it, boss.
and no lectures, capiche?
i worked my ass off to get here.
well, actually it was a group
you sure did.
which is why i deserve to have a little fun.
so buckle up.
yeah, buckle up, larry.
by order of the acting mayor, the carpet must match the drapes.
the penalty is a two hundred dollar fine, 30 days in jail and a burrito.
'cause i'm wicked hungry.
i know what you're doing.
using trumped-up laws as an excuse to round up your enemies.
hitler did it.
stalin did it.
i'd do it if i had the chance.
well, that...
was most amusing.
living the dream, larry.
copy that, fitz is livin' the dream.
congrats general, you're now the proud owner of coverton's first nuclear waste facility.
good times.
nuclear waste?
richard, how is nuclear waste fun?
'cause it glows in the dark, dude.
i'll make sure richard gets this right away.
hey richard, here's the business license money for those hair salon slash brothels.
put it with the others.
what's wrong, buddy?
talk to the lar-bear.
for starters, you're breaking rules one and three.
rules be darned, richard.
i'm your conscience.
we share everything.
memories.
emotions.
french fries...
all this should be making you happy, but you seem miserable.
fuck you.
i'm happy.
i'm fucking delirious.
you're good at many things richard fitzpatrick.
clearly.
but pretending to be something you're not?
that's not one of them.
maybe all of this isn't your dream.
this isn't my dream?
then what the fuck is?
well...
i don't quite know that yet, but i do know that the anxiety you're experiencing is coming from a very deep place.
josh, remember that by-law about no larrys on city property?
yeah, get out here.
you can't lock away the truth, richard.
wanna bet?
bye, larry!
i will hunt you down wherever you hide, asshole.
don't worry, boss, we'll get him.
nice to see you too, darling.
no, i don't have anything better to do than to get up, cram my swollen feet into some shoes and come and get you.
fucking larry...
i'll show him who's fucking happy.
it's not like i've slept in the last three months.
i'm the king of fucking fun.
or gone thirty minutes without peeing.
this is the dream, man.
then you had to call me twelve times.
everybody wants this.
i've got nothing to be anxious about.
where's the support for fitzy?
wah, wah, wah.
all units, we've got an apb, straight from the mayor's office.
suspect is tall, annoying, answers to the name of fuckwad.
fitzpatrick motors.
i'm still only in fitzpatrick motors.
i'm on the run, but every time i wake up...
i wake up here...
rations are scarce.
i'm on the verge of capture...
my bond with richard...
broken.
putrefied.
but i couldn't give up on him.
i knew i had to help him find what was at the heart
of his darkness.
that's it!
interloper!
i can explain...
thieves overrun our dealership like locusts, cousin.
first the she-devil, now him?
explain why you are stealing our lunches.
i think that was josh.
then you must be the one pilfering our toilet supplies.
i think that was josh too.
then maybe it is josh's fault also that we have not turned one cent of profit in over six months?
cousin, you heard the red-haired witch.
only a fitzpatrick could have taken that money from our accounts.
that's right.
it could never be josh.
why would it be josh?
let's start praying to josh!
you must learn to overlook small imperfections for the sake of friendship.
because of josh,
i know fitzpatrick will pay ten thousand dollars to whoever delivers him the gangly one.
that would help pay many of our overdue bills.
and he is ours for the taking.
i suppose this is josh's fault, too.
you said it, not i.
larry's vanished.
did you check the dealership?
yeah...
the dealership.
you fucking idiot.
find him and shut him up.
all i can hear is him rambling all the time.
i can't hear anything.
it's like he's in my head.
and i'm seeing babies.
babies!
whoa, hey!
stay with me, fitzy.
take this, it'll fix you right up.
you feeling okay, buddy?
yeah, everything's fitzy.
just find him.
find him!
all right!
on it.
jeez!
y'ello.
agent mctaggart?
sir, yes sir.
lethal use of force has been authorized.
terminate your target and return to base for debriefing.
okay...
okay, great...
who exactly is my target again?
you've forgotten your target?
no, no!
i just want to be sure that you're who you say you are.
agent mctaggart, the time is now.
ruptal jhalalawan and ruptal jhalalatu.
terminate with extreme prejudice.
buddy...
yaa!
hey, does this look normal to you?
come on.
come on, come on.
pick up.
i know what you want!
fucking josh.
how long have you been hiding there?
long enough to know that this bar, this job, this life you've finally built for yourself
it's not your dream, it's your nightmare.
you don't know anything.
have you been having hallucinations too?
how the fuck did you know about that?
because of our connection, richard.
and a very, very lucky guess.
bullshit.
what else do you got?
is it a coincidence that this newspaper clipping was hanging on the garage wall for 32 years?
i think not, richard.
i think not.
the happiest you've ever been is standing by your father's side the day he opened the dealership.
you need to rebuild that bond, richard if you're ever going to find true happiness, if you're be a loving father to your own son.
that photo doesn't mean shit.
yes, it does - yes it does!
and deep down i know you want me to help you figure out what kind of shit.
yeah, because there's nothing i love more than spending time with you.
please, richard...
the shirley temple on your menu.
hiring iris to...
pleasure my plumbing.
you know you care about me.
shut your yap!
i will not!
and now you're getting a time-out, mister.
i present you with a summons for your arrest.
for what?
i own the cops.
well, a little birdie told the police about your abuse of office.
and the bribes.
and the 23 years of unpaid parking tickets.
my old man was right about one thing
you are a fucking turncoat!
a turncoat who is saving you from your nightmare and finally giving you what you've wanted.
a way to be happy, richard!
get your fucking hands of me!
i'm the mayor!
not anymore.
i'll get you.
if you think prison is going to break richard fitzpatrick, you're dead wrong.
this won't break me!
nothing can break me!
is that a fact?
welcome to my world, fucker.
fuck.
__file_terminal__
hey, pay attention, fuckers...
the devil-father fitzpatrick has found a most ingenious way out of our sales contract.
starting his own religion.
tax-free profits.
halle-fucking-lujah.
we were always good business partners, lainey.
i would like to go for ice cream with you, larry.
more than you could possibly imagine.
we need to shore up votes, and fast.
look who's decided to wake up and give a shit!
fine, but i'm doing this for me, not you.
me.
you know ken's just gonna fuck you over like he always does.
this isn't what it looks like.
that little shit was right about you!
hey, god, it's me, fitz.
i need to speak to frank.
i'm havin' a kid.
and i don't want the little fucker to think i'm a loser, like my old man.
i gotta win this fuckin' election.
so throw me a bone, will ya, frank?
richard fitzpatrick won?
ha!
that's right, fuckers!
fitz won, and i won it for him!
woo hoo!
there are two kinds of people in this world.
those who float above all the shit, and those who run right through it.
genghis khan, he was a floater.
he lead strong, crushed his enemies and the weaklings followed.
people need a leader who tells them what to want, how to get it, and who doesn't have shit on his heels.
first order of business - get my office up to code.
i don't think you get your own office.
the city can't afford it.
then get me one.
with a turntable and my sinatra 45's.
some nudes for the wall.
and a shark tank.
no stripper pole?
already ordered.
richard, we're moments away from tasting our sweet dream together.
it's a bar, cockswab, not a bath house.
time to get shit done.
lead with your balls.
and never apologize when your pubes get in someone's face.
it's fitz o'clock, fuckers.
i'm a councilman now.
retract that titmouse law;
i got a bar to open.
i'm sorry, but we're locked in a stalemate over cat leash ordinance c-39.
all new legislation is to be tabled on a first come first serve basis.
how long's it gonna take?
let's see...
three years.
give or take.
fuck.
okay, look.
i'm sorry city council was too busy with kitty cats to allow you to open your bar right away.
but what a great lesson in patience, am i right?
poor baby hit a roadblock on his first hour at his new job.
you're the one who wanted the job.
i merely got it for you.
and that's why you're fired.
i'm not the enemy here.
and, trust me, you do not want to make me one.
we've been enemies, foxley, and we've been friends.
neither one's done me much good.
[loud crash]
remember this moment, fitz.
because this moment, right here, is exactly when you fucked yourself.
for what it's worth,
i never thought dot was a worthy member of team fitz.
now that the dead weight is gone we can focus on your summerwind dream
could you take a memo for me, larry?
i would be oh so very honored to take your first memo, councilman.
to, larry.
larry.
re: your ass.
ass.
it's fired too.
...fired too.
no, no, no...
i feel so betrayed.
after all i've done for him, he just throws me away like a pair of... dirty underpants.
you know, larry, you're kinda sounding like panties right now.
you want to be panties or you want to be boxer shorts?
huh...
boxer shorts?
fuck yeah.
boxer shorts with big balls in them.
balls that are out to get even.
i always say 'revenge is a dish best served with... [gasp] yeah...
dioxin poisoned sushi.'
nom nom nom...
or, oh yeah, the old water gun full of sulfuric acid.
[mouth noises]
oh, yeah.
the atomic wedgie.
classic...
those all sound a little extreme, josh.
then what's your idea of revenge, larry?
stink bomb in a locker?
don't be such a fucking nerd.
i don't want to take revenge on richard.
revenge on fitz - how can you even think that?
josh, you're the one who
after everything you did to him?
filled his head with false hope.
made him take on a second job.
and now you plot deadly revenge?
oh my god, you're right...
maybe.
you better apologize to fitz or i will punch you in the feelings.
you get me?
if i say anything other than yes you'll hurt me, right?
[sigh]
i'm a wolf.
up on that hill, they're all spineless douchebags.
sheep.
i'll be fucked if i'm gonna listen to them jaw about cat laws all day.
then stick to what you're good at.
right.
what am i good at?
fitz, you're a born salesman.
you knocked me up in the back of a station wagon on my wedding day, got me to leave the only semi-stable, employed man i've met in my life and convinced me that we might work together.
yeah, i showed that weasely fuck.
exactly.
don't worry about the puppets.
you want the guy who pulls the strings.
go after the mayor.
yeah, how hard can it be to get one guy on my side?
especially when he has no backbone and a drinking problem.
we swim in the same circles.
at least we will until i have to go on maternity leave.
well now he's swimming with a shark, baby.
i thought you were a wolf.
you're hot when you're being all smart and shit.
yeah?
mmmm.
[heavy breathing]
mr. fitzpatrick?
call me fitz, mayor andrews.
so... why are we at a naked lady bar?
the buffet is excellent.
lunch?
no, no.
no thanks.
suit yourself.
well...
maybe just one.
atta boy.
but, i'm a servant to the public
they voted you in.
gave you the keys to the joint.
take it for a spin.
do whatever you want.
whenever you want.
you earned that shit.
yeah, i did.
stop asking what people need.
they don't fucking know.
grow a pair.
oooh...
i love you.
i love you!
don't mind, niko.
she's a little shy.
niko!
that's niko.
niko has special skills.
wow, that's quite a talent!
looks like you two could use a little alone time.
hey...
how 'bout some lap dances, hon?
oh, and...
bring a friend.
that chick who can go down on herself, yeah?
giddyup.
[laughs]
giddyup!
ahh!
good news!
i have a plan.
i'm going to apologize!
to richard!
that's right!
i'm going to teach richard the power of forgiveness.
i'll be back at city hall before you can spell
filibuster.
suck it up, kitten.
your boyfriend is gone.
time to give it up.
i'll never give up on richard!
you want to teach him forgiveness?
crush him, larry.
crush him until he crawls back to you, his knees like bloody linguini.
and when the salt from his own tears burns his wounds and he whimpers for someone to end his pain, you can show him forgiveness by caving his skull in with the sledge hammer of a wasted life and an eternity of regret.
we have to drive outside city limits to enjoy ourselves.
it's a god damn crime.
this, right here, is what coverton needs.
a little spice.
am i right?
yeah.
oh my god, yeah.
so let's go downtown and get it done.
like men.
we gotta repeal the titmouse ordinance and get the summerwind back on track, ok?
that sounds good.
so fucking good.
richard, i'm sorry for interrupting.
but i'm here to apologize.
and not for interrupting just now, though i am very sorry for that as well.
spit it out, fucknut.
we're paying by the song here.
richard...
i'm sorry i let you down and you had to fire me.
it is my hope that this apology shows you the value of forgiveness.
larry?
yes?
iris...
you're a stripper?
and you.
you make her take her clothes off?
no, larry.
i pay her to take her clothes off.
and that's not all.
niko, get up there and show 'em the main attraction.
you're gonna love this, larry.
i don't understand.
how could you just
it's just my job, larry.
i didn't know how to tell you.
showing men my dirty pillows makes them happy.
and that makes me happy.
am i right, or am i right?
your bunny...
your bunny that got killed by the gt...
that was a lie?
of course it was, fucknugget.
i had to feed her some bullshit story.
only way i could make sure you'd open up to someone with a vagina.
it's very pretty, by the way.
thank you.
you could have any girl you want.
and you go after iris?
my iris?
i will never forgive you for this.
eff you both!
eff you all to h!
larry, wait!
whoa!
where'd that second one come from?
[laughter] [laughter continues]
our debate is at a critical juncture, cats are urinating willy-nilly, and you have the nerve to sleep in?
someone needs to get laid.
or likes to get peed on.
point is, sit down and shut the fuck up.
this cat law bullshit is finito.
that's right.
we're having a motherfucking vote all up in this bitch.
i'll second the shit out of that.
okay.
who wants cat leashes?
and those who are all like, 'no way'?
okay.
no leashes!
free pussy!
[laughs]
and the other thing.
don't forget the other thing.
oh yeah.
and fitz - who is wicked by the way - you guys should all hang with him - is now deputy mayor.
but you said i was gonna be deputy.
how would you like your face punched in, eh?
all right.
motion carried.
richard fitzpatrick is the man.
now...
i move we all go over to the danger zone and have lunch.
the buffet is the bomb.
[laughs] that buffet...
come on!
come on, kids...
you guys...
fitz'll introduce you to all sorts of delicacies...
ah, that buffet.
mr. mayor!
how did your little apology go?
i'm done with apologies.
you're in good company, friend.
i know we've had our share of differences over the years, larry.
but, as you can see, the league of sober entrepreneurs prides itself on being an inclusive lobby group.
please, have a seat.
if we are 'sober entrepreneurs' why are we meeting in a bar?
because fuck off, that's why.
the league of sober entrepreneurs?
'l.o.s.e.r.s.' for short.
shut up.
i said no acronyms and it's my group.
now, as per our mission statement
'the league of sober entrepreneurs lobbies government to destroy that degenerate dickhead,
richard fitzpatrick.'
'dickhead' was my contribution.
we have the resources.
we have the manpower.
now we just need a plan.
i have a plan.
we'll hit fitz where it hurts...
looks like someone's grown a set of lady balls.
stand back, miss foxley.
with a one two combo of caring and compelling arguments,
i, larry, will make our plan heard...
and hopefully implemented...
if...
if people like it.
you're planning.
i'm execution.
i'll deal with mayor bitchass.
it's andrews.
mayor andrews.
let's skip the names and focus on the fucking.
focus on the what now?
beg your pardon, ma'am?
don't beg.
not yet.
that comes after i rip, tear, slap, lick, scream, claw, spank, bite, suck, whip, slurp and swallow.
ah!
that's when you can beg.
does that sound ok to you?
if i yell yes and this is a dream, will i wake myself up?
first things first.
we have a by-law to pass.
[laughter] [mimicks laughter]
god damn mayor, what the fuck's he doing?
fitz, i want you to know up front, this wasn't my idea!
so nice of you to join us, richard.
what the fuck?
the fuck, mr. fitzpatrick, is prohibition.
what are you losers talking about?
so you've heard of our organization?
good.
you see, maverick, while you were at the danger zone, we had a little chat with city council about coverton's declining morality.
she's very...
persuasive.
and they were only too happy to put the last nail in the coffin of your pathetic dream.
a near-unanimous vote.
if it makes you feel any better, buddy,
i abstained.
i told you not to fuck with me.
you backstabbing semen chugger.
this was your idea, wasn't it.
sticks and stones may break my bones but council passed the vote.
coverton is a dry town, richard.
the summerwind will never open.
well, we'll always have the danger zone, huh, buddy?
council's controversial move to pass prohibition has indignant citizens... swarming the streets.
an emergency council session has been called for this afternoon to deal with the chaos...
this is melody gray, reporting live from the mean streets of coverton.
prohibition - what are they, nuts?
fitzy!
where the fuck have you been?
here's the thing.
your friends helped me realize it was high time i straighten up and fly right.
so i quit drinking and joined aa.
and you should join too.
how do you live with yourself?
cheap suits.
piece of shit car.
now you want to deprive yourself of the one thing that makes you happy?
you're pathetic.
you're right.
i shouldn't have quit drinking.
what the hell was i thinking of?
aa?
all right, look.
we can fix this, buddy.
we can really make it work...
um... maybe.
right?
sit your flip-flopping ass down, and listen up.
great idea.
genius, actually.
where do you come up with this stuff?
you need to act fast and repeal prohibition.
swift action.
that's the move.
right on, brother.
well, wait, can i do that?
i'll have to ask someone.
don't ask.
tell.
at today's council meeting.
here's the thing.
i have a tummy ache so i'm gonna skip that.
a couple nights ago
i saw you strip down to a lime green thong and throat-punch a biker in pervert's row.
i did?
oh yeah, you did.
and it was awesome.
you were unstoppable.
and what now?
flop sweats and shakes?
they tell me alcoholism is a disease...
only symptom i've seen is the vagina you've grown.
what?
no, i
oh, you're speaking metaphorically.
you hear all those people out there?
rioting in the streets?
[birds chirping]
you know why?
because they're in pain.
pain that you caused.
oh my god.
what have i done?
you want to make it up to them?
to me?
axe prohibition.
everyone will forgive and forget.
don't listen to him.
he doesn't know anything about forgiveness.
he's right.
you can't trust anything fitz has to say on this issue.
you're right.
i can't.
why not?
he isn't here for the good of the people.
richard only wants to repeal prohibition so he can open his lounge.
it's a clear conflict of interest, and it's selfish and manipulative and mean.
don't listen to these schmucks.
you make up your own mind and do what i say.
totally.
well...
i can see that both of you present really, really, compelling arguments...
take both of those arguments to council...
you!
get your ass to council chambers.
we gotta get this town drinking again!
[exhales] god, do i miss that smell.
me too.
ah!
what the hell are you doing?
well, don't make your hair smell like daisies if you don't want people to smell it.
i mean in my apartment, chester.
you left your bedroom window unlocked.
i wanted to make sure you knew before someone broke in.
chester, you have got to leave me alone.
and that includes singing coldplay on my voice mail.
but i brought the renovation plans.
this doesn't mean we can't still start a home practice.
can't you just see it?
you and me working side by side?
baby chester frolicking at our feet?
chester, our relationship is over.
i will not renege on the promise my spermatozoa made to your ovum.
my pregnant wife will not leave me for some booze swiller.
people change.
fitz cares about me.
he cares about us.
fitz cares about one thing.
i see the way he looks at you.
all he wants is for that baby to be out of your belly.
so you and he can...
you had a threesome with my baby?
chester...
about the baby...
ahh!
die!
why won't you die?
how dare you impregnate my wife!
hey!
i just had sex with her.
she did the rest.
don't listen to him.
he will twist your mind, steal your family and rub your tender heart against a cheese grater.
get him out of here!
this is a closed session!
you see?
this isn't about prohibition.
or what's good for this town.
these l.o.s.e.r. assholes are out to get me.
they're here because they hate me.
i don't hate you.
of course you do.
no richard.
hate didn't bring me here today.
hope did.
oh cool.
like the black guy named after that terrorist.
all his ideas seemed to work out.
go ahead.
i'm here because i believe, deep down, people are good.
but it can be difficult to bring that goodness out of them.
sometimes you have to force them to see it.
am i the only guy who thinks that sounds kinda rapey?
mr. mayor, i applaud you.
i think you are a man of action, integrity and intestinal fortitude.
i think i am, too.
he's bullshitting you, andrews.
don't fall for his touchy feely crap.
mayor, you have the power to convince people to do what's right, no matter how hard that may be.
it's time to give the people of coverton what they need.
some tough love.
yeah...
yeah!
i'm gonna love the shit out of this town whether they like it or not.
i motion to declare a state of emergency.
expand police powers.
redouble our efforts to make sure prohibition sticks.
second!
what the fuck?
all those for?
so carried.
see fitz?
i've got balls.
you happy now, larry?
destroyed my dream and my life.
no richard, you did.
with your selfishness.
that's a shit apology.
by the way, i don't accept, cock pocket.
all these years,
i've fought everything you are in a vain attempt to make you change.
doing the same thing and expecting different results
that's insanity.
no, insanity is some prostate milking assbandit showing up in a bunny suit claiming to be my conscience.
you're the one who betrayed me.
and aided in the debauchery of an innocent girl.
innocent?
you only met iris because i hired her to keep you company.
you did?
thanks for not closing the deal.
saved me a bundle.
richard...
do you know what this means?
you care about me.
really and truly.
i only did it to distract your dumb ass from fucking up my campaign.
no, richard, hiring iris.
that was... nice.
consider it a parting gift.
you can't leave now.
we're finally making progress.
i never wanted you in my fucking life in the first place!
i don't need a fucking conscience!
and i never will!
[tires squeal]
your sobriety isn't just a commitment to yourself, it's a commitment to others.
in step 9, we'll learn the value of making ammends to those we've harmed with our disease.
oh, you are right.
you are so right.
aw, fitzy, i have to apologize!
i have to make amends!
i never meant to hurt you, buddy.
you did so much for me!
[cars honking] [sobbing]
fitzy!
[sobbing]
i'll miss you, buddy.
hey, remember that time we got drunk together?
sure you do.
fitz, i've made up my mind.
i'm going back to work and it does not make me a bad mother no matter what anyone says - including my mother.
your mother is dead.
exactly.*** just hours after declaring a state of emergency,
and being unhappy would make me dead too - inside.**** mayor andrews suffered what police have described as a 'sober driving accident.'
hell yeah.
with the mayor's life hanging by a thread, governance of coverton falls to his deputy mayor richard fitzpatrick.
god help us all.
ring a ding ding.
this is melody gray reporting live from the scene of the accident.
pray for mayor andrews.
ring a ding ding.
__file_terminal__
hey, pay attention, fuckers...
you stole that wurlitzer from my shop.
i want it back.
this isn't what it looks like.
the gay mafia are after me.
i need this cash!
i know where to find you jukebox, and the ass-clown who boosted it.
someone wishes to buy this cursed business that haemorrhages money.
you're selling the dealership?
this place is richard's dream, and the it's the only thing holding this family together.
your dream lounge, the summerwind?
you pinned all your hopes on the only emotion connection you ever had with ken!
the song that he played for you as a baby!
help us get out of here!
oh god!
aliens?
meghan?
she is all yours now.
i am having this baby.
baby!
i'll drive!
oh my gosh, do something!
come back here!
escape the country?
what?
good idea, meghan.
oh my god!
no thanks, everyone.
i'm fine.
hello?
a lot of stupid shit goes through your mind when you're breaking out of prison.
[screaming]
but when the spotlight is on you and you've got your nuts in a vise, the only thing that matters is getting the fuck out.
escape is a state of mind.
and there's no prison that fitzy can't break out of.
no way!
meghan?
fitz?
fuck.
where the fuck's houdini when you need him?
[cell door slamming]
oh, for the love of fuck, it's coming!
don't worry, miss devon, we will get you to the hospital safe and sound and in time to witness this beautiful, miraculous....
i need motherfucking drugs.
i got some meth, but it's prison meth.
i got hash, and oxy contin.
oxy?
i could use a hit.
get in line.
you're fucking kidding me.
halfsies?
i'm the one in labour.
try to hold off having the kid in the car, will ya?
it'll stain the leather and kill the re-sale value.
whoa!
what the fuck are you doing?
fuck, you don't have to have it in the ditch!
oh, i'm not.
get out!
what the hell did i do?
what haven't you done!
you're unemployed, you've never made it to any of the doctor's appointments, you're never around!
i broke out of prison!
for you!
when have you ever done anything in your life for anyone but yourself?
okay, food for thought.
and since richard is an escaped convict, maybe we can ponder this on the road.
let's - can we get a move on, please?
you shut the fuck up!
i will not let you smear your failure all over this baby.
get out of my life, you fucking loser!
[echoes]
hey!
fuck!
richard!
don't leave me here with this crazy broad!
oh god!
richard!
richard, i know this is a trying time for us, but it's also an excellent opportunity to dig deep, and find out what's really going on here.
huh?
breathe!
no, really, what's going on here?
she thinks i'm a loser!
no, i doubt that's true.
did you hear me, fitz?
you're a fuckin' loser!
i can't have my fucking kid thinking his old man is a loser!
let's work on this in the car!
i have to get the dealership back from those two carbomb-istanis.
let's figure out how to pay for that in the car!
you get her to the hospital,
i'll take care of the dealership.
and evade the police?
i'll call you in an hour.
two hours.
oh!
that's right!
drive!
find the closest motel!
oh, i can handle this.
i don't need him.
i've been through worse.
i told you the kid was a loser.
he's actually a winner now, sir.
richard has decided to make the baby proud, and buy back the dealership.
the dealership?
yep.
over my dead body!
you said you didn't want it.
first rule of business:
lie.
you should be proud too, ali, because you and the baby are having a positive effect on the fitzpatricks.
hey!
it's true.
oh...
what are you doing!
hey!
that's my truck, man!
you can't keep me here, you know.
this is a men's prison.
i'm a woman.
it is clearly a violation of the, uh...
geneva convention.
and if i actually get violated, that's another violation.
so let me take a wild guess...
you just happened to be in the neighbourhood on the night that your brother and father broke out of jail?
no, stupid!
i was here because my stupid brother's stupid girlfriend was in stupid labour, so...
she is?
where did they take her?
what can you do for me?
i'm up on tax evasion charges because of my dad's church scam...
i want immunity.
by the power invested in me by the town of coverton,
i now declare you not guilty, okay?
they were headed back into town.
daddy and richard were fighting about the dealership,
ali was all like, "i'm havin' a baby,
i'm a fuckin' idiot!", so...
thank you.
okay.
arrest her.
what?
aiding and abetting escaped prisoners.
you can't do that!
put me down!
what the fuck!
gentlemen...
it's been a pleasure.
we countersign when we get the money.
you get the $500,000 when you sign these documents.
well, it would appear we are in the midst of a mexican stand-off.
i blackmailed elaine fitzpatrick for her shares in this dealership.
you think i'm scared of you?
sign!
[clears throat]
thank you.
[sighs]
if we did not need the money, never would i sell to that harpy!
they need both our signatures to sell, cousin...
and right now, she only has yours.
swift thinking, cousin!
once again, the ruptals have tactical advantage.
excellent.
[phone rings]
fitzpatrick motors, currently run by the far superior cousins ruptal.
not for long, fucks.
i want to buy my dealership back.
i made a mint on that church scam.
it's the infirm fitzpatrick!
he too wishes to purchase the dealership!
let's negotiate.
haggle!
you know, foreplay, for you ethnics.
the flashing lights of opportunity dance around us, cousin!
we will sell the dealership twice!
meet us at the dui.
bring cash.
[siren wailing]
fuck.
license and registration.
of course.
my name is paco.
paco vasquez.
i'm on my way to a costume party.
that's funny, mr vasquez.
you look an awful lot like an apb they just put out...
ken fitzpatrick.
look, officer, i'm just trying to do a little business here.
yeah, me too.
i got a buddy looking for you.
a real good buddy, if you know what i mean.
fuck.
the gay mob.
cocksucker!
you say that like it's a bad thing.
out of the car.
fuck!
hey fitzy!
i can see that orange jumpsuit from 5000 feet!
what the fuck, josh?
just here to get my stash, and i'm out of here, man.
no, no...
fuck, josh, i need your help!
bad timing, fitzy.
i gotta get out of the country before i kill the ruptals.
you leave now, your c.o.'s just gonna send someone else.
oh god, you're right, they're doomed.
you gotta help me save 'em!
no, fuck that, josh!
i'm an escaped fucking felon!
i gotta figure out how to get this shit palace back before my kid is born!
you think you work for the government, you'll figure something out!
know what, i was a government agent!
and i'm not gonna kill the ruptals!
i need you to help save those men!
both of them!
larry, i do not want to have my baby in a garage!
what the fuck, larry, you're supposed to take her to the hospital!
there's no time.
the head...
the head!
will someone call me a fucking ambulance?
look, as i have explained - repeatedly - we can't risk involving the authorities!
richard is an escaped felon!
i'm not!
try to hold on until i get my place back.
fuck you!
would someone just call me a cab?
you're a cab.
i'll call my own cab.
no, no!
my kid is gonna have an old man that he can be proud of.
how much time do i have?
the contractions are four minutes apart.
godspeed, richard.
godspeed!
i gotta lie down!
listen, for the love of kid, i'll help you.
but you've gotta promise me...
you promise me that when you talk to the ruptals, you will not tell them that i have to kill them.
give me the dealership, pronto, or josh will have to kill you.
dude!
really?
josh, surely this is a joke.
tell them.
operation blackout.
terminate suspected terrorists
ruptal jhalalawan and ruptal jhalalatu.
with extreme prejudice.
it was nose hair clippers, okay?
i...
i could never hijack a plane with nose hair clippers!
it's not just that.
the feds have a file on you a mile thick.
for what?
c-4 in your stationary closet?
no, that was me.
or the jihad that you declared on ken?
no, that was fitz.
all this time, i was a mission?
i thought we were friends.
hey, wait... wait!
you were a mission...
became a friend.
bottom line is you're dead men if you stay here.
you sign over your shares in the dealership to me,
i'll get you new identities, a ride.
we'll fake your deaths.
i have no doubt you're an expert in faking things.
we'll give you until midnight.
ring a ding ding.
listen, i
cousin, this is perfect!
by the time they uncover our treachery, we'll be.. "dead".
we sell the dealership three times!
wonderful!
wish i were dead.
all right, you take care of the ids, the car, and faking their deaths.
i'll get a burger.
ruptal loved burgers.
with pickles.
[phone rings] fuck.
too late, shit bubble.
i just signed a deal with the ruptals.
by midnight, the dealership will be mine.
i need to talk to you about something.
about what?
the father/son dance i was gonna ask you to.
what the fuck do you think?
the gay mob nabbed me off exit 9.
i need you to get my wurlitzer from the storage unit.
and why should i give a fuck?
because you helped this repressed cock-lover get it out of florida.
that puts both of you on my shit list!
[cocks gun] that's not a list you want to be on, sugar.
look, just get the thing, will ya!
all right, fine.
i'll get your fuckin' wurlitzer.
on one condition...
you're in no position to negotiate, slick.
i was talking to the half-sack.
i do this for you, you drop your bid for the dealership.
got it?
fuck.
deal.
you got one hour.
larry, get me out of here...
don't think of this as a garage, think of it as an automotive birthing station.
huh?
my child will be born in a crack den.
you couldn't put down some plastic first?
where's richard?
i don't know.
don't worry, ali devon, i will find him.
you stay with her.
tell me you know something about delivering a baby because i have no fucking idea.
let uncle joshy handle this.
for he has an earthquake kit.
ali-bear!
it's chester!
chester vince!
look, i don't care what some dna test or a restraining order says,
i am that child's father, okay?
i massaged that belly, and i sang to that foetus, and i was the one who slept on the couch!
so give me a chance!
a chance to be the most attentive father in the world!
well, it's official.
chester vince has been appointed vacated seat of disgraced councillor and felon at large, richard fitzpatrick.
don't forget your friends on the air, mr. vi
sweet mother of zeus!
[tires squeal]
fuck me.
didn't that twat farm ever throw anything away?
ah!
oh!
richard?
don't worry, i left ali with josh.
you fucking idiot!
i'm trying to show her i'm not a loser, and now josh is the first face that kid is gonna see?
right.
fuck.
oh, what's the fucking point?
the kid deserves better - not an old man who's a
don't you say it, richard.
because it is not true.
you are not the l word.
people do not depend on people who are the l word.
and right now, there are a lot of people depending on you, mister.
so you find your self-esteem, and we will find that jukebox.
you just have to dig a little deeper.
is it a speech impediment that makes you always sound like a greeting card?
no, really, we just have to dig a little deeper.
huh?
here we go...
well, looky-looky.
ta da!
huh?
now what do you say we get a dilapidated wurlitzer to a homicidal homosexual?
this thing is a piece of shit.
how come that fruit-cup has such a hard-on for it?
it's not worth 40 k.
it's gotta be some kind of scam.
that shit i said?
yeah?
fuck that.
fitzy's no loser.
i'm a fuckin' genius.
[chuckles] [loud scream]
oh, let's see here.
headlamp, hand-cranked radio/flashlight, cyanide pills, uh...
glowstick!
it's like a rave in a bucket!
[loud scream]
ever since i was a little girl with a doll and a toy stroller, i didn't want kids!
i don't even like kids!
me neither!
let's see here, uh...
all right!
congratulations!
you've just survived an earthquake...
oh!
god, what was i thinking?
a single thirty-something mother, no husband, no prospects, not a single shard of self-respect!
oh!
i think i can see the baby!
ha!
he's got short, curly black hair in the shape of a lightning bolt.
it kind of looks like harry potter!
oh!
okay...
oh god!
let's see!
[loud whistle] [screaming]
ah...
good.
very good.
that's it?
all you wanted was some fucking record?
not just some record...
the" record!
bananarama's greatest hit?
hey, watch your mouth, boy.
you're fucking with an antiques dealer.
a deal's a deal.
and you asked for the wurlitzer, so...
it's all yours.
and it's a bitch to move.
drive safe, mr vasquez.
if you're ever in miami stay the fuck away from my shop.
see you later, old man.
i got a kid to make proud.
not if i get there first.
hey!
we had a fucking deal!
yeah, that's cheating!
no, it's fitzpatrick!
$300,000, cash!
josh has your new identities.
there's a van on the lot, gassed and ready to go.
and by morning, the government will think you're dead.
hm...
i'm talking real money here.
give it!
i've got something that'll blow the geezer's offer out of the water.
yeah!
huh?
give it!
did you ever hear of the legend of the lost sinatra single?
uh-uh.
only an idiot has not.
well here it is.
frank's lone shot at a rock 'n' roll career reboot.
he only had one single pressed.
hated it, and had the master tapes destroyed.
but a technician hid the 45 in the one place he knew frank would never look.
the wurlitzer!
from the sands!
motherfucker!
you switched it out!
yeah.
[snickering] [whispering] this is wrong.
if we continue this lie, we are no better than they are.
of course we are.
lie!
the only way you could beat the highest bidder, is by combining your offers.
in business with him?
no fucking way!
[gasp] richard!
this is fate giving you a chance!
look, for the sake of your child, and your grandchild
i implore you as father and son, and mentor and servant, to finally bury this hatchet!
to work together!
to carry on tradition!
to shut me up!
deal.
i'll handle the paperwork!
you've got a baby on the way, buddy.
nice.
motherfucker!
somebody buy me a drink!
[screaming]
there's a mirror!
do you want to see?
oh, for the love of god, no!
all right, i did it!
i own this place now!
fitzy's no loser.
i got this.
no, don't leave me alone with him!
oh!
i don't care what you own!
you are the last person i want down there!
this isn't my first pilgrimage to your promise land, baby.
now, you do what you gotta do.
[screaming]
oh!
you did this to me, you son of a bitch!
i will kill you for this!
yeah, anytime now.
oh!
i will cut off a limb for every stretchmark you gave me!
that's good!
good hustle!
come on now!
come on, one more!
[scream]
i will shove a cinderblock up your asshole and make you shit it out!
is it a boy or a girl?
hey...
he's a fitzpatrick.
awesome.
hey buddy.
oh fuck... [baby fussing]
all this time i've been vilifying fitz, but at least he's been running around trying to make you proud.
what have i done?
besides the biological miracle of growing you inside me...
as per your request, miss devon, a taxi is en route to take you to the hospital.
in the meantime,
uncle larry has just the thing to help get the little guy to sleep.
[baby fussing] [baby fussing]
your daddy's not a loser.
i am.
♪ the summer wind came blowin' in ♪
♪ from across the sea ♪
your passports, birth certificates, driver's licenses, and library cards.
oh, and uh...
i got you a little something as well.
come on, come on!
shut up!
you shut up!
shut up!
ruptal, listen...
no, don't.
i don't think i could ever forgive your lies, josh.
i understand.
but, uh...
craven moorehead would like to thank you for saving his life.
your accent's gettin' pretty good.
you're a good teacher.
[honks horn]
ah, just so i know...
how will we die?
i don't know yet.
but i do know one thing.
it'll be a death worthy of a friend.
oh, and, uh...
i'm also gonna need some teeth.
uh, hi, ali, it's me.
uh, listen,
i'm gonna be a little bit late for our future.
okay?
but everything's gonna be fine.
no matter what you heard.
it's all good.
they're gonna take me to the home world now.
but i'll be back soon, okay?
i'm ready!
you need a drink?
now you're speaking my language.
[baby crying]
[electrical buzzing]
congratulations, richard, ken.
a new partnership, and a new fitzpatrick.
i know your relationship isn't where you want it to be, but we've got plenty of time to work on that.
especially if we don't get thrown back into jail the second we walk out this door.
[chuckles] [sigh] ah, cheers.
i get the big office.
fuck that.
i built that place from the ground up.
the big office is mine.
actually, it's mine.
a sales contract?
you bought the dealership?
bullshit.
where'd you get the scratch to outbid us?
with the money i siphoned from the ruptals' bank accounts.
those oblivious idiots.
an unfinished contract means nada, dot.
only one signature.
well...
i still have elaine's shares which makes us all partners.
fuck.
[distant sirens]
holy coincidence, or what!
oh...
rest in peace, my ruptal brother.
[kisses]
larry, tell me you've been keeping up our insurance premiums.
you know it, buddy.
with that money, we can build a place twice this size.
yeah...
once again, everything works out for good old fitzy.
ring a ding ding.
rat bastard.
motherfucker.
burn, baby, burn.
yeah.
[laughs] [baby fussing]
__file_terminal__
hi!
hello!
daddy!
mummy!
corvax!
sylvia!
oh, mummy!
i love princess sylvia.
take him away!
take him away, take him away...
thank you, corvax.
name?
bob.
age?
twenty.
job?
gardener.
take him away.
number nineteen.
number nineteen?
number nineteen!
number nineteen?
..
nine.
ten.
eleven.
twelve.
thirteen.
fourteen.
fifteen.
sixteen.
seventeen.
eighteen.
nineteen.
twenty.
nineteen!
a monster!
hello.
i'm muzzy.
big muzzy.
the big muzzy story.
i'm hungry.
lovely!
i like clocks.
i'm hungry.
plums!
lovely plums!
what's this?
it's a plum.
what?
what's this?
i don't know.
it's a bike.
what's this?
i don't know.
it's a spaceship.
what's this?
it's a clock.
what's this?
it's a clock.
no, it's a parking meter.
what's this?
it's a typewriter.
no, it's a computer.
what's this?
it's a cat.
what's that?
it's my bell.
see you!
what's this?
it's a plum.
eat it!
i don't like it!
look.
how about this?
what is it?
it's a peach.
eat it!
it's lovely.
eat it!
no!
horrible!
i don't like it.
it's horrible.
i don't like this and i don't like that.
this.
that.
this.
that.
this.
that.
this.
i don't like this and i don't like that.
i don't like these and i don't like those.
what's that?
what's that thing?
what thing?
that thing.
that thing!
it's a parking meter.
a parking meter?
yes.
you...
lovely!
i like this!
i like parking meters.
name?
what's your name?
muzzy.
no, big muzzy.
age?
lovely!
take him away, take him away...
hello.
hello, monster.
i'm muzzy.
hello, i'm a friend.
who are you?
what's your name?
b...
berb...
what's your name?
bob!
who are you?
who?
who are you?
i'm the king.
no, it isn't for you.
who are you?
i'm the queen.
no, it isn't for you.
who's this?
it's the princess!
no, it isn't for her.
who's that?
it's corvax.
you're corvax?
yes, i am.
this is for you.
here you are.
thank you.
who...
who are you?
i'm norman.
bye!
now, who are you?
i'm bob.
i'm a gardener.
who are you?
where do you come from?
there!
up there!
where?
there!
up there!
i come from up there.
there.
where?
where do you come from?
france.
where do you come from?
britain.
where do you come from?
germany.
where do you come from?
italy.
where do you come from?
greece.
and i come from japan.
bye!
i come from up there, and now i'm down here.
i'm here, too.
oh, sylvia.
s - y - l - v - i - a.
i love you.
b - o - b.
a - a,
b - b,
c - c,
d - d,
e - e,
f - f,
g - g,
h - h,
i - i,
j - j,
k - k,
l - l,
m - m,
n - n,
o - o,
p - p,
q - q,
r - r,
s - s,
t - t,
u - u,
v - v,
w - w.
x - x,
y - y,
z - z.
sylvia!
stop it, corvax!
go away!
i love bob!
i love you, sylvia.
oh, go away!
stop!
sylvia!
stop!
come here!
oh, sylvia!
stop!
come here!
corvax!
go away!
stop!
come here!
look!
listen!
go away.
stop!
come here!
look!
listen!
go away!
oh sylvia!
sylvia!
__file_terminal__
how do you do?
i'm the king.
i'm the king of gondoland.
how do you do?
i'm the queen.
hello.
i'm princess sylvia.
oh, sylvia!
sylvia!
hello.
i'm bob.
i'm the gardener.
how do you do?
i'm corvax.
thank you, corvax.
hi!
i'm muzzy.
big muzzy.
good morning.
i'm norman.
good morning.
good... afternoon.
good afternoon.
good evening.
good night.
i'm strong.
i'm fat.
i'm beautiful.
i'm clever.
i'm brave.
strong.
fat.
beautiful
clever.
and brave.
you're strong.
yes, i am.
and you're fat.
yes, i am.
and she's beautiful.
yes, she is.
he's brave.
and he's clever.
no, no!
i'm clever.
clever.
strong.
fat.
beautiful.
clever.
and brave.
big.
i'm big.
big muzzy.
big.
small.
i'm big muzzy.
big.
small.
big.
small.
big.
small.
big.
small.
and i'm big muzzy.
i've got a bag.
a big bag.
i've got a map.
i've got a hamburger.
i've got a bike.
a motorbike.
i've got a computer.
i've got a garden.
look!
i've got plums.
i've got peaches.
i've got grapes.
i like plums.
i like peaches.
i like grapes.
and i like grapes.
hello, mummy.
hello, daddy.
can i have a peach, please?
i like hamburgers.
can i have a hamburger, please?
here you are.
thank you.
can i have a salad, please?
here you are.
thank you.
can i have a drink, please?
here you are.
thank you.
can i have an ice-cream, please?
here you are.
thank you.
can i have a wash, please?
can i have a peach please, daddy?
yes.
a peach!
a peach.
thank you.
can i have a plum and some grapes, please?
yes.
a plum and some grapes!
a plum and some grapes.
thank you.
a plum - a peach - a grape.
a plum - a peach - some grapes.
a plum - a plum - a plum!
three plums!
jackpot!
plums!
bob!
yes?
trees!
trees?
yes.
how many trees?
count!
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
how many trees are there?
one, two,
three, four,
five, six,
seven, eight,
nine, ten.
bushes!
how many bushes are there?
there are two - four - six - eight - ten.
and how many flowers are there?
flowers?
yes.
how many flowers?
a hundred?
two hundred?
three hundred?
i don't know.
a hundred and seven.
a hundred and eight.
a hundred and nine.
a hundred and ten.
bob!
can i have a rose, please?
thank you.
i like roses.
and i like you.
oh, look!
i've got a rose.
i've got a plum and a peach and some grapes.
a hamburger and a map.
and i've got... a bike.
i love you.
and i love you.
off we go!
no!
i love the princess!
i love sylvia!
a, e, i, o, u.
i love you.
a, u, o, i, e.
you love me.
a, e, i, u, o.
off we go.
i, o, u, e, a.
far, far away.
a, u, i, o, e.
you love me.
a, e, i, o, u.
l love you!
a, e, i, o, u.
i love you!
the gardener loves the princess?
yes!
no!
the princess loves the gardener?
yes!
no!
come on!
off we go!
follow me!
bye!
__file_terminal__
go away!
ah, sylvia.
i love you.
s - y - l - v - i - a.
that's right.
corvax...
loves...
sylvia.
oh, sylvia!
your eyes, your...
the body.
a head.
an eye.
a nose.
a mouth.
an ear.
a neck.
an arm.
a hand.
a leg.
a foot.
good!
my sylvia.
i've got you now.
print!
lovely.
that's good.
where is it?
here it is!
and this.
now where...?
here!
now!
go!
sylvia!
my sylvia!
now i've got you.
u - double z
y.
b.
you and me.
we!
we're friends.
we are bob and muzzy,
muzzy and bob are we.
me and you, we are two,
two great friends are we.
we are bob and muzzy,
muzzy and bob are we.
me and you, we are two,
two great friends are we.
hey!
look!
what?
look!
up there!
bars.
lovely, delicious, yummy bars.
oh no.
no, thanks.
yes!
eat the bars.
one!
two!
three!
four!
five!
we're free!
you're free... and i'm free.
we are free!
you are free and i am free.
we are free.
you and me.
we are free!
free?
yes.
we're free.
off we go!
you and me.
i'm free!
i'm wet, i'm cold and i'm hungry.
but i'm free.
cold.
hot.
hungry.
thirsty.
wet.
dry.
i'm thirsty!
have a drink.
it's hot!
oh, sorry!
i'm hungry.
have a hamburger.
i'm hot.
have a shower.
i'm wet.
have a towel.
i'm cold.
have a sweater.
i'm tired.
have a rest.
it's cold.
bob!
bob?
where are you?
bob!
muzzy!
bob!
where are you?
here!
where?
i can't see you.
i'm here.
in the tree.
what tree?
this tree.
where are you?
i'm under...
where?
where are you?
under the box.
where are you?
on the box.
where are you?
in the box.
where are you?
in front of the box.
where are you?
behind the box.
where are you?
between the boxes.
where's the box?
over there.
where's the box now?
over here.
in, on, under, in front of, behind, between.
in, on, under, in front of, behind,
between.
are you all right?
oh, yes.
just cold and wet and hungry.
where's the palace?
it's over there.
where?
there it is, over there.
that's the palace.
sylvia's there!
i'm corvax.
listen!
can you hear me?
look!
can you see me?
can you talk?
yes, i can.
can you walk?
no, i can't.
let me try again.
now can you walk?
yes, i can.
can you run?
no, i can't.
let me try again.
sylvia, do you love me?
no, i don't.
i don't like you.
oh, sylvia!
now i can run.
bye!
sylvia stop!
come back!
what's happening?
i can walk.
i can talk.
i can hear.
i can see.
who are you?
am i you?
are you me?
i can jump.
i can swim.
i can run.
this is fun.
i am you.
you are me.
who are we?
who are you?
i'm sylvia.
you're sylvia.
yes, we are.
six sylvias?
yes.
who are they?
sylvia!
six sylvias!
you've got a green dress.
you've got a red dress.
she's got a blue dress.
i like brown.
i've got a yellow dress.
yellow is for happiness.
black and white looks all right.
but i like brown.
black... and white.
yellow.
blue.
red.
green.
brown.
see you!
__file_terminal__
head and shoulders.
knees and toes, knees and toes.
eyes and mouth and ears and nose.
ears and nose...
where are we?
we're in the garden.
what, your garden?
no, silly!
the palace garden.
look!
there's sylvia!
what's she doing?
she's doing her exercises.
knees and nose, knees and toes...
quick!
behind this thing!
what thing?
the statue.
are you all right?
no, we aren't.
we're hungry.
can we have some food, please?
can i have a clock, please?
a clock?
excuse me.
yes.
a clock.
he likes clocks.
somebody's coming.
who is it?
i don't know.
i can't see.
ok!
oh, no!
it's raining.
look, wait over there.
ok.
see you this evening.
when?
seven o'clock.
see you at seven this evening.
seven o'clock.
right!
what's the time now?
it's eight o'clock.
hello?
no, i'm busy.
i'm having breakfast.
it's one o'clock.
hello?
no, i'm busy.
i'm having lunch.
it's seven o'clock.
hello?
no, i'm busy.
i'm having dinner.
it's nine o'clock.
hello?
no, i'm busy.
i'm having a bath.
it's ten o'clock.
hello?
busy?
no, i'm going to bed.
good night!
one o'clock.
it's lunch-time.
it's lunch-time, dear.
i'm coming.
it's lunch-time, sylvia.
i'm not very well.
can i have lunch in my room?
what's the matter?
i've got a terrible headache.
a headache.
stomachache.
toothache.
backache.
come in.
what's the matter?
i've got a headache, doctor.
a headache?
take this.
thank you, doctor.
next!
what's the matter?
i've got stomachache, doctor.
stomachache?
take this.
thank you, doctor.
next!
what's the matter?
i've got toothache, doctor.
toothache?
take this.
thank you, doctor.
next!
what's the matter?
i've got backache, doctor.
backache?
take this.
thank you, doctor.
a headache?
stay in your room, dear, and have a rest.
lunch for the princess in her room!
sylvia isn't very well.
she's got a headache.
she's having lunch in her room.
his.
her.
her knife.
his knife.
his fork.
her fork.
her glass.
his glass.
his plate.
her plate.
her bowl.
his bowl.
his crown.
her crown.
a headache!
hello, sylvia.
how are you now?
how am i?
i'm fine, thank you.
where are you going?
i'm going to the swimming pool.
see you!
have a nice swim, dear.
hello, sylvia.
how are you now?
feeling better?
i'm fine.
good, good, good.
where are you going?
i'm going to the tennis court.
see you!
have a nice game, dear.
sylvia's feeling better now.
she's playing tennis.
playing tennis?
no, she isn't.
she's having a swim.
hello, mummy!
hello, daddy!
bye!
__file_terminal__
is it still working?
yes it's working.
good evening.
how many sylvias are there?
six.
no, there are seven.
is it still raining?
no, it's fine now.
it's getting dark.
what's the time?
it's nearly seven o'clock.
it gets dark at seven.
in autumn it gets dark at seven.
autumn?
autumn.
winter.
spring.
summer.
in autumn it gets dark at seven.
in winter it gets dark at five.
in spring it gets dark at seven.
in summer it gets dark at nine.
september.
october.
november.
december.
january.
february.
march.
april.
may.
june.
july.
august.
january.
february.
march.
april.
may.
june.
july.
august.
september.
monday.
tuesday.
wednesday.
thursday.
friday.
saturday.
sunday.
on monday i play football.
on tuesday i play basketball.
on wednesday i go roller- skating.
on thursday i do my exercises.
on friday i go swimming.
on saturday i play golf.
and on sunday we play tennis.
when?
when do you play football?
on monday!
when do you play basketball?
on tuesday!
when do you go roller-skating?
on wednesday.
when do you do your exercises?
on thursday.
when do you go swimming?
on friday.
when do you play golf?
on saturday.
when do you play tennis?
on sunday.
and it's sunday today.
and we're playing tennis now.
where's princess sylvia's room?
there!
where, on the first floor?
no, it's on the second floor.
oh, there are three rooms on the second floor.
which one is it?
is it the one on the left?
no, it isn't.
is it the one on the right?
no, it isn't.
is it the one in the middle?
yes, it is.
it's the one in the middle.
what about the room up there?
the one on the top floor.
that's corvax's room.
it's the computer room.
stop it!
no!
food.
clocks.
seven p.m.
i've got some food.
i've got some clocks.
and it's nearly seven o'clock.
ok.
open the door... quietly!
look around... carefully!
run downstairs... quickly!
hello sylvia!
hello.
that's me!
oh!
it's seven.
bob's waiting.
that's me again!
seven o'clock!
it's dinner-time, sylvia!
yes, mummy.
look, they're all sylvias.
how many are there?
there are three in the kitchen.
four in the hall.
there's one by the fireplace.
there are two against the wall.
there's one in the sitting-room bouncing on the chairs.
and four are having lots of fun, sliding down the stairs.
there are hundreds in the garden picking all the flowers.
and lots in the bathrooms turning on the showers.
lots on the chandeliers.
more over there!
more of them and more of them, appearing everywhere!
where are they all coming from?
look, they're coming from corvax's room upstairs.
what's he doing?
go and see... quick!
stop it!
help!
corvax!
what are you doing?
i'm not doing anything.
it's the computer.
help!
listen!
help!
it's sylvia.
oh, bob!
i'm frightened.
why?
why are you frightened?
because there are lots of sylvias in the palace.
sylvias?
excuse me.
have you got any clocks?
oh, muzzy!
here you are.
muzzy, why do you eat clocks?
because i like them, of course.
why?
oh, dear!
he's crying.
why are you crying?
because i can't reach the apple.
why can't you reach the apple?
because i'm small.
i can reach the apple.
yes.
why?
because you're tall.
right!
here you are!
thanks.
bye!
hey!
that's my apple, and my bike.
come back!
that's mine!
gotcha!
now, is this my bike?
yes, it's yours.
yes, it's mine.
and where's my apple?
you can't have it.
why not?
because it's in here.
oh, bob.
lots of sylvias?
ah!
i see.
corvax!
the computer!
bob!
where are you going?
to the computer room.
come on!
follow me!
__file_terminal__
that's me.
jane quimby.
my life is a little complicated right now.
i landed my fashion dream job working for her,
gray chandler murray.
the only problem, they think i'm an adult.
now i am juggling two secret lives, one in high school and one in high fashion.
do you trust india?
i just think she's a little shady.
i'm afraid we have to say goodbye.
i hope you're happy.
you did this to yourself, india.
you got the wrong person.
all right, fellas.
here's how it's going down.
are you robbing this place, tommy?
let's go!
a couple months at new hall youth detention might give mr. nutter ample time to think about those mistakes and their implications.
i saw her with nick.
they were kissing, janey.
it's not what you think.
just let me...
don't.
i can't talk to you.
and you really deserve the perfect guy, rita shaw.
you are perfect.
i really have no idea how to say this.
so i'm just gonna say it.
it's you, janey.
jane.
jane!
let's go.
you're gonna be late for school again, truant.
that guidance counselor of yours is gonna come down on you hard.
you know how miss shaw can be.
ben.
it's a little weird that you call your girlfriend "miss shaw.
oh, you mean rita.
hey.
are you really that busy?
yes.
and no.
i'm nervous, ben.
two months is a long time.
what if billy's different?
what if he doesn't want to see me?
jane.
he was in a juvenile detention center, not a brainwashing camp.
you'll be the first person he wants to see.
besides, why would anything be different with you two?
well, the thing is
i might not have told you everything that happened that night at the fashion show.
see, when billy showed up he sort of...
well, he...
i'm waiting.
bated breath over here.
he said something.
and would you like to tell me what that something was, exactly?
he said, "it's you.
it's you?
yeah.
oh, boy.
what?
then what happened?
well, then jeremy came in and i didn't know what to do and then billy ran out and the next morning he got sent away and for the past two months it's been playing on a loop in my head.
it's you, it's you, it's you." what do you think it means?
well, i may be totally off-base here, but did you ever think he might have meant it romantically?
no.
no, no, no.
i did think that for a second.
but i don't think that's it.
but i guess it can be.
i don't know.
maybe it is.
i don't know.
would that be so weird?
well, he's my best friend and i don't want to run the risk of ruining that, right?
i can't answer that.
then what good are you?
just go pick up billy and you two will figure it out.
you know why?
because you guys are like this.
you can figure out anything.
i sure hope so.
i missed you.
i missed you, too, janey.
jane by design 1x11
the replacement original air date june 5, 2012
that's it?
yeah, i mean, i don't know what else to say.
it was pretty uneventful.
you were in a juvenile detention center.
so?
so, was it scary?
were the guards mean?
did you make any friends?
how was the food?
did you...
jane.
look.
i wasn't in alcatraz or anything, okay?
i just...
i'd rather talk about something else, okay?
okay.
maybe we should talk about, you know...
yeah, you!
so, what about you?
what's been going on with that whole super secret double life of yours since i've been away?
oh.
nothing, really.
how's jeremy?
jeremy?
yeah, you guys are together, right?
no.
we've never been together.
he doesn't even know that i'm in high school.
and we work together.
i could never do that.
speaking of work.
how is it?
well, things have been crazy ever since india got fired.
gray has been using me for everything.
it's nuts.
and she's been through at least a dozen people to fill india's job.
wow.
that's a lot of people.
tell me about it.
and you should see the stuff that she's having me do.
i can't even believe it.
i mean, don't get me wrong,
i love being creatively involved at donovan decker...
you okay?
let's just say to be back here again.
and this place same way about me.
don't worry about them.
and, billy...
yeah?
are we okay?
shouldn't we, talk or something?
you've been talking non-stop ever since we got in the car, jane.
right.
i mean, about...
we're good.
yeah.
there's nothing for us to talk about, okay?
unless you want to talk about that.
you have got to be kidding me.
yep.
lulu and nick.
they've been an item ever since you left school.
looks like it's just back to being the two of us.
yeah.
the two of us.
jane, i have to be honest.
i'm a little disappointed.
disappointed?
i'm just surprised.
that's all.
this progress report does not reflect the academic performance of the jane quimby that i know.
your grades are slipping in every class but ceramics.
well, that's good, right?
your brother got an a in ceramics.
ouch.
and it's not just your grades.
your attendance last month?
let's just say it was less than perfect.
i know.
i'm sorry.
this internship is interfering with your life.
your grades aren't what they used to be, you have multiple tardies and absences and that just can't happen.
i know, i know.
but i'm not just looking off into the future for my dream job.
i mean, i'm already here.
this is my life.
it's just an internship, jane.
it's not.
i'm working with designers and i'm being exposed to this whole world of fashion that you can't learn in a classroom.
i'm living it every day.
you can't buy that kind of experience, you know?
fine.
but i need to see some real changes.
because if this doesn't improve,
i can't sign off on the internship program for you next semester.
especially if you're not...
wait.
are you texting someone right now?
uh, what?
no.
i am just typing a reminder to myself to shape up at school.
stat.
i promise i'll get things back on track at school.
you have my word.
sorry.
i know this might sound harsh, but you've been an incredible disappointment, sally.
it's suzy.
your work has been lackluster.
your ideas, well, you simply have none.
in your time here at donovan decker, you've yet to show any real promise.
but i've only been working here for two days.
two days too many, i'm afraid.
you're fired.
that'll be all.
what?
that's five this month, gray.
well, it's been harder to replace india than i might've realized.
perhaps if you...
but i'm not worried.
i have a new prospect in mind.
someone young and unexpected.
someone not boxed in by years of design experience.
you don't mean...
you're not talking about...
i have to go.
my next appointment is here.
oh, hi.
hi.
martyn!
gray, darling!
so.
classic.
clean.
powerful.
it's a whole new delicious look to match your title of creative director.
what do you think?
do you like it?
i'm afraid i don't.
i love it.
you're a genius.
thank you, carter.
girl, how many hats does gray have you wearing right now?
more than you own.
i doubt that.
am i the only one that's twice as busy since india left?
i think we're all starting to feel the pressure.
but you more than anyone.
'cause whenever gray says jump...
i say, "over whom?" and, "in pumps or flats?
i just really hope this new girl works out.
well, don't get your hopes up.
hey.
what can i do for you, muffin?
that's a "no" on kissing at work and the whole muffin thing.
yeah, i know.
it didn't quite feel right coming out.
i need the kids here to respect me, ben.
we need to be professional.
got it.
we're on the same page.
so, what's up?
i had a conversation with jane this morning.
i'm just a little concerned.
don't worry.
she's good with it.
with what?
with us dating.
no.
ben.
i'm concerned about jane.
i just got her progress report and she's falling behind.
i think this internship is just too demanding on her, don't you?
actually, i kind of think it's been good.
but i promise i'll make sure she stays focused on school.
you know why?
because your love life depends on it?
bingo.
i know you've all been working tremendously hard lately.
but you're gonna have to work tremendously harder.
donovan decker has been selected to collaborate on a capsule collection with one of the world's most famous luxury department stores,
harrods.
that is, unless we blow it.
and we cannot blow it.
understood?
okay.
didn't i fire you?
no.
oh.
see me in my office afterwards.
the style director assigned to oversee our harrods collection will be coming by tomorrow.
now, can anyone tell me what is our number one priority?
carter?
um, to impress the style director and ensure harrods is confident that donovan decker has what it takes?
precisely.
now, i need all hands on deck for the next two days.
no exceptions.
is that clear?
if that is clear, then walk away and get back to work.
now.
can i talk to you for a moment?
as long as gray doesn't see.
because apparently, we're all supposed to be working tremendously harder than we were before.
whatever that means.
did you hear that she fired sally?
do you mean suzy?
right.
oh, my gosh.
i'm turning into gray, aren't i?
jane...
not that that would be a bad thing.
i just think...
what?
jane!
i'm going to tell you something and i need you not to react, okay?
okay?
no, no, no, no.
i'm serious, jane.
okay.
gray is giving you india's old job.
what?
me?
no reaction.
right.
take over india's job?
i am so not ready for that.
then you best get ready.
janey?
you ready?
almost!
i'll be out in a minute!
morning, miss shaw.
good morning, billy.
you mind handing me the milk?
yes.
of course.
oh, and miss shaw?
yes, billy?
i think your toast is ready.
wait.
you're actually considering this?
no.
yes?
i don't know.
i mean, taking india's old job would be the opportunity of a lifetime.
how could i say no?
what's wrong?
nothing, i...
i just...
you'd really consider leaving here?
just leaving school behind?
maybe.
why?
no reason.
talk to me, billy.
no, i'm good.
oh, you're good?
is that right?
yeah.
it is.
fine.
whatever.
so, now you're mad at me?
yeah.
i am.
billy, you've been shutting me out.
about everything.
what is going on with you?
and how can i help if you won't even talk to me?
what do you want to talk about?
for starters, how about the fashion show?
you ran out before we could even have a conversation.
it was nothing, janey.
nothing?
that's your story?
look, i was in a bad place.
i was getting sent away.
that's it.
there's nothing for us to talk about.
things are different now.
i'm different.
yeah, tell me about it.
what is that supposed to mean?
it means you have changed.
and, if you ask me, it's not for the better.
hmm.
i didn't ask you, jane.
fine!
then be that way!
i will!
well, then do it!
i said i will!
what was that about?
i don't know, ben.
maybe i took your advice and i tried to talk to him about the whole "it's you" thing and maybe it backfired.
sorry about that.
i'm worried about billy.
it can't be easy for him to fall back into his old life here.
well, maybe you could help him find something positive to focus on?
such as?
i don't know, maybe an activity or something?
like mathletes.
or chess club.
i'm being serious, rita.
so am i.
come on.
chess?
mathletes?
what, do you want him to be more of an outcast?
those are terrible clubs.
i was in those clubs, ben.
and you were adorable doing it.
shoot.
vice principal jenkins!
what a surprise to see you!
in the hall.
at school.
where we work.
hey, rita.
what're you naughty kids up to this fine morning?
naughty?
why would you even...
we are...
were...
we were just talking.
that is all.
i said "mop"!
and i'll stop talking now.
good idea.
good morning, jenkins.
good morning, rita.
and...
ben.
that was close.
no.
that was awkward.
really awkward.
what's gotten into you?
you said you want to keep it professional at work, right?
do you think he knows?
knows what?
about you and me, of course.
how would he know that, ben?
are you kidding?
we ooze chemistry.
don't say ooze.
hi.
how are you, billy?
oh, you know how it is, just trying to get my bearings back.
that's good.
yep.
so, what's been going on with you?
sorry.
stupid question.
so, you and fadden, huh?
how's that one working out for you?
to be honest, i thought it was going pretty well.
that is until you got back.
i thought i could forget about us, b...
there is no more us, lu.
but i really do hope things between you and nick work out.
because you deserve it.
you're precipitating.
excuse me?
your calcium is starting to form a precipitate.
you should dry out the crystals.
oh.
um...
thanks.
busy, huh?
mmm-hmm.
you're not gonna cut me any slack here, are you?
maybe.
but just a little.
okay.
i guess i deserve that.
i'm really sorry, jane.
for what it's worth, i made a big mistake.
huge, in fact.
and i regret it.
it's fine.
really, i'm just distracted.
and you know what?
i think it all worked out for the best.
you and lulu seem very happy.
yeah.
the thing is...
i...
is everything okay?
yeah, it's just, um...
oh, i, uh...
i have to go.
oh.
yeah.
thanks.
you wanted to see me, ben?
good hands.
thanks.
first day back.
how're you doing?
i'm fine, ben.
oh, i get it.
this must be the part where you ask me how i'm adjusting.
no, i just thought now that you're back, you might want to hit the ground running.
find a positive outlet.
for what?
i don't know, something to keep you busy.
focus your energy.
such as...
how about football?
seriously?
yeah.
you got a pair of hands on you.
i mean, you're a little stringy, but you're probably very elusive.
hard to tackle.
baseball?
oh, my.
are you kidding me right now?
why not just give it a shot?
look, ben.
i appreciate you trying to help reacclimate me or whatever it is that you're trying to do here.
but, in case you hadn't noticed,
i'm not really the team sport type.
are you sure you're doing okay?
i'm fine.
because, jane told me about...
do you really want to do this, benjamin?
i'd like to.
i'd prefer if we didn't.
excuse me.
coming through.
hi, guys.
i have to leave school because of an emergency at work and rita can't know under any circumstances because then i would lose my internship and that can't happen.
so i really need you guys to help me out okay?
can you cover for me?
i don't think so.
no way.
what?
look, i know that you are mad at me and that you don't really like to do this sort of thing, but can't you just cover for me?
maybe like a cold, cramps, anything.
i don't like lying to rita.
it's just a teeny-tiny little white lie.
and that's how it all starts.
that's correct.
fine.
i don't need your help.
i can handle this on my own.
oops.
sorry.
that's okay.
hey, i'm actually a little lost.
oh, well, maybe i can point you in the right direction.
who are you delivering those to?
you think i'm a flower delivery guy?
i did.
a second ago.
but now i'm a little unsure.
they're for gray chandler murray.
oh.
great.
i'm gray's assistant.
jane.
so i can just take those to her.
i'd rather give them to her myself if that's okay.
the thing is gray's not exactly the hand delivery type.
what type is she?
she's more of a "don't bother me with that kind of crap" type.
so, if you're not the flower delivery guy, who are you?
eli.
i have an appointment with gray.
today?
no, it's tomorrow.
i just thought i'd get here early in case i got lost.
why would you get here a whole day...
oh, that was a joke.
funny.
you didn't laugh.
well, it wasn't laugh out loud funny.
the thing is gray doesn't have any appointments today.
well, she called me directly.
gray?
called you?
on the phone?
yeah.
crazy, right?
so, what is this appointment about?
something about a job opening.
a job.
and you're interviewing for it?
yeah.
are you gonna point me in the right direction or should i...
oh, gosh.
yes, sorry.
right this way.
so, you got any tips for me?
tips?
yeah, you know, like advice for the interview.
oh, um, just don't take anything gray says to you personally.
she can be a little cold.
so, you're saying she's mean?
oh, no, no, no.
not mean.
she's just not very...
nice?
eli, you're here!
oh!
and you brought me flowers.
yeah, well, i haven't seen you in a while.
and i know lilies are your favorite.
jane, i see you've met my nephew, eli.
yeah, we...
nephew?
yeah.
jane was actually just talking about you.
oh.
and what did she say?
only that you're warm and gorgeous and incredibly talented.
is that right?
that is right.
eli, come into my office.
jane, hold all my calls.
it was nice to meet you, jane.
nephew?
who is that?
his name is eli.
i don't like the look of him.
well, you should probably keep that one to yourself.
and why is that?
because he is gray's nephew.
and from the looks of it, he might also be india's new replacement.
he seems great.
he is.
something you want to add?
no.
i...
spit it out, jane.
i just...
i feel a little silly saying this, but for a second there i thought that
i was in the running for india's job.
you are.
where's jane?
my sister, jane?
yes, ben.
your sister jane.
i heard she went home early.
and right after i had that talk with her.
did you know about this?
yes.
i am aware of her departure.
what'd she say?
she said some things about cramps.
cramps.
you know, lady stuff.
i'm not that familiar with lady stuff, so i'd really rather not discuss it.
uh-huh.
hi, billy.
hello, miss shaw.
i heard jane went home.
she okay?
she'll be fine.
just a cold.
is that right?
mmm-hmm.
a cold?
yeah.
all right, peace.
white chocolate half-caff latte.
your favorite.
and i picked up the tear sheets that you wanted this morning.
and i got you a reservation tomorrow night at per se.
i thought you said they were booked up for the next two months.
they are.
i pulled some strings.
well done, jane.
and i thought you might like to take a look at these.
what's this?
some sketches.
of mine.
just some new ideas for the accessories line.
i'll take a look.
impressive.
you're still here.
yeah, gray said i should stick around a while and check out the place.
is that right?
it is.
that's nice.
hey.
hello, jane.
can i ask you a question?
you just did.
what?
you asked if you could ask me something.
technically, that is a question.
sometimes you are way too british.
there's no such thing.
okay, come on, i'm serious, jeremy.
at your service, miss quimby.
okay, so about this whole job offer thing.
do you really think it's a good idea?
in what respect?
well, in that i'm an assistant.
and the closest i've come to studying design is,
i don't know, the endless hours i spent and fashion magazines every weekend.
this is a huge job.
why would gray trust me to handle something like this?
because you can.
eli seems way more qualified and he's...
he's nothing to worry about.
you have to run your own race, jane.
and you, you've got what it takes.
you really think so?
i know so.
plus, you deserve it.
thank you.
i just really don't know if this is the right thing for me right now.
are you insane?
i have a lot of stuff going on at home.
my best friend was away for a while and now he's back and...
is this the same friend from the fashion show?
isn't he the reason you turned me down?
jeremy, we've talked about this.
you're my mentor and my friend.
yeah, yeah, yeah.
no need to rub it in.
all i'm saying is i don't know if it's the right time to leave him...
to leave him behind.
that is why he was so upset.
i'm not really following your chain of thought here.
oh, it's nothing.
sorry.
thank you.
thank you for all of your help.
you're welcome.
sup?
wow!
one one thousand, two one thousand, three one thousand...
hey, you.
what's going on with you?
i was parched.
you're avoiding me.
what are you talking about?
i'm trying to keep things discreet.
between us.
you know?
you're lying to me about jane.
what?
no.
billy said she has a cold.
that was me!
you said she had cramps.
did not.
i have to go.
go where?
i have to go to the house to check on jane.
you've got me really worried about these cold cramps.
that's a great idea.
i'm going with you.
and if jane isn't home sick in bed, that internship of hers is over.
you have to get jane home!
now!
what happened?
the collective brain power of you and me.
that's what happened.
you said cramps, didn't you?
there's no time for blame.
yes.
i said cramps.
you just couldn't stay out of it, could you?
i told rita that i was going home to check on jane, and now she's coming with me.
so jane has to be home, in bed, sick, and fast.
i thought we were staying out of it.
can't you just call her?
i've called her like a dozen times.
it keeps going to voicemail.
ben, it's just the whole racing to save jane thing, it's not really my problem anymore.
look.
i'm not happy about this either, and i know you two are going through some sort of weird time right now, but she needs us.
otherwise this whole fashion dream thing of hers is out the window.
she's my sister.
i can't bring myself to do that to her.
can you?
i can't compete with this guy.
trust me.
she's not going to hire her nephew.
you sure about that?
look, i didn't go to school for design.
and i know my technique isn't exactly refined like the rest of you extremely talented people.
but, given the chance, i might be able to bring something new to the table here at donovan decker.
something different.
something fresh.
now i heard that you're already selling your own line, is that true?
i do what i can.
mostly, right now i'm just selling my stuff at pop-up shops or on the street.
honestly, the money i make barely covers materials, but i love it.
and that's what it's all about.
yeah, i think so, too, carter.
are you listening to this?
he's perfect.
he's charming and talented and good-looking
he's not that good-looking.
i'm serious, jeremy.
there's no way i actually have a chance of getting this job.
not if i'm up against a guy like that.
which i am.
please.
it's a courtesy, jane.
a family obligation.
this is gray we're talking about.
she's not going to actually hire anyone she has to be nice to.
good point.
you are probably right.
yeah, i'm always right.
you said we were leaving to check on jane 20 minutes ago.
and we are.
i just have to grade a few more of these puppies and we are on our way.
ten minutes, ben.
and then we're going.
understood?
understood.
and if i find out you are lying, we're gonna have a serious issue.
i'm pleased to announce that i have found the perfect person to fill the vacancy left by india jourdain.
it's you.
what?
i'm certain of it.
this person has proven that they have exceptional creativity and style.
this person is destined to be a rising star here at donovan decker.
this person is...
wait!
what, jane?
i'm sorry.
i just...
i can't.
can't?
i can't do this.
i'd like to take myself out of the running.
i'm so sorry, gray.
i really am grateful.
i just...
i don't think i'm ready for this.
and i agree.
which is why i'm pleased to introduce our newest designer,
eli chandler.
billy, what are you doing here?
we need to get you home.
what happened?
what do you think happened?
ben said cramps, didn't he?
yeah.
you know your brother doesn't think fast on his feet.
this is true.
and now miss shaw is on her way to your house to visit your sickbed.
what do you think's faster right now?
5th or lex?
we're gonna have to...
you came for me.
i did.
and i'm not gonna let that be for nothing.
come on.
we have to get you home.
now.
jane, i'm on my way to the house.
i've stalled as long as i can and i just can't keep lying to rita.
your chariot awaits.
mmm-hmm.
drive.
now.
what was that for?
no reason.
oh, this is a shortcut.
oh!
come on, janey!
oh, wait.
pajamas!
jane?
are you feeling okay?
maybe we should just let her sleep a little bit.
wait a minute.
what is going on here?
oh, hey guys.
i'm feeling much...
much better.
i just have a cold.
and cramps.
so i just needed to...
double whammy.
hmm.
well, feel better, okay, jane?
thanks, miss shaw.
i'm sorry, ben.
for what?
for the whole manhunt thing.
coming down on you.
honestly,
i feel terrible for questioning you, accusing you of lying.
i don't know what got into me.
i think you're just being the best guidance counselor in the history of guidance counselors, that's all.
thank you.
that was far, far too close.
tell me about it.
oh, my gosh.
and how about me turning down that job that i wasn't even being offered?
so embarrassing.
it wasn't so bad.
okay, it was pretty bad.
i counted eight people cringing.
did you count me?
okay.
nine.
i know you wanted that job.
honestly, i wasn't ready to leave being a teenager behind just yet.
and i am definitely not ready to leave you.
two months away.
it was a long time, billy.
i missed you.
i missed you, too, janey.
being away was terrible and lonely.
but knowing you'd be here waiting was the only thing that got me through.
i have to ask you...
you said, "it's you,
and i need to know if you meant...
i meant
that it's you, janey.
you are my best friend.
the very best.
and i don't want that to ever change.
because that's what's most important, right?
yeah.
it is.
remember.
we must impress this harrods style director at any cost.
donovan is depending on us.
hello, losers.
that's right.
i'm the one you've been waiting for.
where's jane?
i can't wait to catch up.
__file_terminal__
previously on "top shot".
the blue team votes jack and paul into elimination challenge.
everyone who came in just want it to demonstrate good sportsmanship.
you [bleep] voted me into elimination.
[bleep] off.
jake:
they clearly wanted me to go to this elimination, and now they're gonna reap what they sow.
donaldson:
jake goes 3 for 3!
jake survives...
jake's not a gun nut." but i can outshoot you.
donaldson:
and decides he has no more use for the blue team.
i ain't gonna be nobody's whipping boy.
it's nothing against you personally.
i'm moving outside.
i'm thinking i voted for the right guy.
donaldson:
the red team loses the trick-shot challenge...
he laid it on me.
i was outshot.
donaldson:
...and after eight challenges, the teams are tied at four apiece.
there are shots that changed history...
feats of legendary skill and extreme precision.
now 16 of today's best marksmen have been chosen.
they come from all over the country and from all walks of life.
amateurs and professionals, military, recreation, and exhibition shooters.
each shows the timeless skills of a true marksman...
not just with one weapon, with any weapon.
they will compete in a gauntlet of challenges until only one remains, earning $100,000 prize, and the title of "top shot.
man:
hey.
hey, guys.
there's a cliff!
cliff:
i won the challenge.
i'm back in the house.
i'm back with my team.
everything's gonna be fine.
but we all decided that, you know, mike was the weakest shooter, so we all shot his target, and he got his choice.
man:
all right.
there he is.
red mike.
for me, the next thing i want to accomplish is making the green team, and then i think i'll be much better off.
i'll sink or swim on my own ability and not have to worry about other people on the team doing their job.
it's a shame he's gone, man.
it made it easy for us to win and [bleep]
[ man laughs ]
we can't count on him [bleep] up on the line and going 0-for no more and [bleep] you know?
man:
no, you can't.
i'm gonna miss mike a lot, you know?
it was awesome having such a poor shooter on the red team to give us victories and needed wins.
mike had the audacity to put my name on a target on the wall of the house prior to me going to elimination range.
so it's kind of awesome that i get to stand here in front of something that he made to me, and he's at home, and i'm still in the competition.
good morning, guys.
morning.
well, we started with 16 marksmen, and with billy dropping out and michael's elimination, we have cut the field in half, and we're all tied up again.
one of you eight is gonna go home with the $100,000 prize and the title of history's "top shot.
so far, you guys have run a gauntlet of challenges, using some pretty amazing weapons.
but there is a class of weapons we have yet to introduce on this season of "top shot"...
archery.
how many archers we have in the group?
man:
mm, mm.
all right.
for the next team challenge, and this weapon is all about instinct.
this is our way of seeing who here has the natural ability to adapt.
the recurve bow is one of the oldest archery weapons documented, as far back as the 2nd millennium b.c.
it gets its name from the outward curves at the very ends of the bow.
this ancient innovation gives the recurve the capacity to store more energy than straight-limbed bows.
will focus on a very unusual skill...
skipping arrows off a metal ramp.
gary:
i'm really excited about using a recurve bow.
in my preparations for "top shot,
my brothers had me practicing with a recurve bow.
so adapting to that, i think, made me just about ready for anything "top shot" could throw at me.
donaldson:
for the practice and challenge, you'll be using a modern recurve bow.
we've invited world-class archer chris palmer to help prepare you for the next challenge.
not many people use the recurve bow anymore, so even if you have some archery experience, there are some specific skills you need to learn for this weapon.
let's get to it.
red team, you guys are up first.
blue team, you can head back to the house.
you'll practice later.
good luck.
have fun.
see you all at the challenge.
how's it going?
gary.
hi.
how you doing?
hi, gary.
gary:
the fact that we're shooting a traditional recurve bow with no sights, nothing fancy...
it's all instinctive, and to me, that is a true test of marksmanship.
it's very enlightening for me, you know, just to see how everybody does with the recurve bow.
this is gonna be all off instinct.
definitely do not try to aim.
all i can say is, look at your target...
is if you try, right now.
all right.
okay?
go ahead, chris.
all right.
collins:
i shot youth competition, but always with a compound bow...
never with a recurve.
this is definitely a new venue...
very limited experience with a recurve bow.
you're to-the-right or left guy?
i'm a right-handed guy.
the primary difference is, with a compound bow, you have a sighting system, and when you pull it all the way to the rear, there's a huge let-off.
so, you can hold it there forever.
with a recurve, that's not the case.
don't hold it.
the longer you hold it, you're gonna start shaking.
now.
man:
good shot.
there you go.
good shot, chris.
collins:
you just whip the arrow where you feel, instinctively, it's going to go, and that's how you have to get good at it.
nice.
man #2:
there you go.
nice, phil.
that was right in the middle of the ramp.
good shot.
it adds a layer of difficulty.
but you just got to look at where your point of impact is on the ramp and then look up at the slot you're shooting at to see where your arrows are impacting, and then you adjust on the ramp accordingly.
in between the fingers...
all right.
put the arrow on the bottom of the hand right there.
whoop.
and don't do that.
don't do that.
all right.
cliff:
i have never shot any kind of a bow ever in my life, other than, you know, being 5 years old and shot the one with the suction cups on the end.
so i'm definitely gonna be at a disadvantage for this practice and the challenge.
oh.
that's all right.
cliff:
ohh.
it hit and then bounced.
is he's drawing it back literally in front of his face.
[ chuckles ] palmer:
you're pulling straight to your mouth.
you need to be pulling straight to the side of your face.
oh, i thought we were supposed to come to...
you're supposed to come to the side corner of your mouth.
boom.
there you go.
good shot.
gary:
i think, going into this, chris, phil, and myself...
cliff was the one that was having the biggest problem, and at the end of the day, he's doing pretty well.
man:
there you go.
that's it right there.
you are dialing in.
i think that we will do well during the challenge.
alex:
i think i'm a good archer.
i've been shooting archery since, literally, i could hold a bow... probably 4 or 5...
it's gonna be tough.
man:
nice.
that's low.
i don't have any experience with the recurve bow.
i usually utilize technology and just go with a compound bow.
and so a recurve's new to me...
100%.
geez.
right away, mike has come up and has got this little book, and he's got a lot of questions for me.
is our objective to hit that white?
your objective is to hit where you can, and if you can, yes, hit it.
so, i want to hit the white.
i already can tell that he's gonna be thinking about this way too hard.
[ arrow fires ]
that hit that low, and it was still low.
so you're gonna have to adjust.
and you guys can back up, too, you know, and move around.
there's just nothing that you can write down on a piece of paper that's going to help you.
all it takes is practice.
way to go, alex.
i just hope the ground will be different.
pal, you're working yourself up.
i know this is important to you.
trying to think of all this other stuff.
[ arrow fires ] man.
it is funny trying to watch alex and mike do all their math and calculations.
so, if we get lower, are we gonna get more height off that?
not necessarily.
it depends on how low you are shooting to that spot.
dustin:
it's kind of boggling their engineering minds, and i'm just kind of playing around with it and having fun.
did he bounce that?
okay.
man:
no.
you can stand there and talk 15 minutes...
i can shoot a couple straight into the board.
is that all right with you?
no, it's not.
all right, "well, i'm still gonna do it, so...
at one point, jake and mike started fighting.
dude, listen.
they were acting like a bunch of kids.
it's like, "what are you guys doing?
i know that i'm the best recurve bow shooter
i've been shooting bow and arrow since i was 4 years old.
i was so small when i first started off,
i had to stand on a milk crate to be able to shoot the bow and arrow.
i'm not an olympic bow guy, but you don't want to be standing in front of me if i'm shooting at you with a recurve b.
man.
hughes:
i'd probably say this is probably one of the least productive practices we've had.
i don't think we got a feel for, like, how to really adjust that ramp.
so we'll just have to see tomorrow.
man:
nice.
man #2:
nice shot.
jake:
so, at this point, the blue team thinks i'm a complete buffoon, so they don't want to give me credit at all for being able to do anything well, no matter how well i can do it, which is fine.
i mean, i want them to underestimate me so that falls right into my plan.
gary:
who in this house right now are you afraid to go head-to-head against?
mike with a pistol.
so he'd be your first vote...
to get him out?
yeah, put him in there.
i want the best person to go home, not the worst.
jake:
to put it honestly, i don't know if "top shot
has seen a competitor like me.
and the first two seasons, i think, have been gentlemen's shows, and then they put a commando like me on this and brought a whole different edge to the competition.
i'm gonna find a way to win at all costs, no matter what the odds are.
and i really don't care how i get it done.
if i'm understanding you right, you want to knock off all the stronger players, so in the end, you can go up against the weakest one.
why would you not want to do that in life?
[ laughs ]
that's a bully mentality, man.
you just want to go up against the weaker ones?
let me ask you this...
would you rather drop a 5,000-pound bomb on 50 guys' heads or run in there with a sword and give them a chance?
this ain't war.
this is a sporting event.
no.
this is a sporting event.
it's winning or losing...
that's what it comes down to.
it comes down to winning or losing.
you know, the first thing we learned in s.e.a.l. training was the best s.e.a.l. ops were the ones and they never knew you were there.
you can say, "well, there's no honor in fighting that way,
but at the end of the day, i don't really care.
i'm trying to get my men back to safety, and if i got to blow up people to do that, well, so be it.
i tell you...
i would like to test my pistol skills against mike because, if i did win this, i want to know that i walked out beating the best people i could beat.
if you got an opportunity to put the best dudes out, [bleep] go compete against sisters of the poor...
gary:
there's absolutely nothing that jake does in this house that makes sense to me whatsoever.
he's kind of the anti-team member.
i think he'd get along a whole lot better in the house.
he'd be a whole lot better competitor.
this is a sportsmen's challenge, and he is the most unsportsmanlike person
i've ever been associated with.
at the end of the day, i don't want my family to watch this [ man chuckles ] oh.
yeah, that's no problem with that.
i can understand that.
i don't have that problem.
my family knows who i am, and they ain't never gonna say i'm scared.
jake:
the guys in the house are telling me that i'm not playing the game correctly, and i'm not listening to them.
you know, i don't ever listen to anybody.
i'm trying to win "top shot,
and if i can go against the worst person in the finals, then i did my job.
gary:
walking into the challenge range today, it looks very intimidating.
not only do we have to skip these arrows off of a ramp to hit a target, but now we find out it's gonna be a moving target.
so the level of difficulty in this thing is just...
it's beyond me.
i really don't understand how this is gonna work out.
donaldson:
coming up on "top shot"...
go!
[bleep] jake:
there's nothing conventional about this.
you can't have practice for this.
and it looks like it's gonna be almost impossible.
welcome fellows, to the team challenge.
each of you has had the opportunity to hone your skills with the recurve bow.
let's hope you learned what you needed to.
this will be a side-by-side challenge, guys.
50 feet out on the range, we've set up two matching wheels.
there are six 12-inch targets on each wheel.
you'll also notice the ramp leading up to each wheel.
on my go, an archer from each team will run up to the firing line and pick up a recurve bow.
you'll fire arrows at the ramp...
each archer will get up to three arrows per turn.
your turn is over when you either hit a target or shoot all three arrows, whichever comes first.
after taking your turn, put the bow down.
run to the back of your team's line.
then the next shooter will head up, take his shots.
archers will cycle through the line as many times as it takes.
an arrow shot directly into a target you got to bounce it off the ramp.
members of the winning team will be safe from elimination.
members of the losing team, however, must go to the nomination range
jake:
i'm immediately struck by how absolutely insane this challenge looks.
i mean, in all honestly, it looks like it's gonna be almost impossible.
there's nothing conventional about this.
you can't have practice for this.
i mean, it looks incredibly hard.
guys, take your starting positions.
let's do this.
here we go.
dustin's first up for the blue team.
gary grabbing the recurve bow for the red team.
dustin's g one downrange.
oh!
gary sticks it in the wall right in front of his target.
dustin's got one more shot.
dustin:
i shoot my three arrows, this whole ramp thing is really messing with my head.
donaldson:
jake up next for the blue team.
gary misses on all three of his arrows.
come on.
go.
that's tough.
jake fires his first.
phil up next for the red team.
man:
come on, phil.
[bleep]
man #2:
oh, good shot, jake.
man #3:
good shot, jake.
man #4:
there you go!
donaldson:
phil hits a target.
red... first on the board.
jake:
i knew exactly where the arrows were flying.
i just mistimed the rotation of the wheels.
jake gets a point for the blue team.
we're all tied up.
jake:
i sent the third arrow, and it stuck in the board.
and i knew that this challenge was gonna be difficult, but not undoable.
donaldson:
chris up next for the red team, going up against alex.
man:
come on, chris!
let's go, now!
there you go!
chris sticks his first arrow!
phil:
chris hits the target...
great.
but he has a little bit of a mental lapse.
phil:
chris, off the line!
oh!
chris, off the line!
aw [bleep]
phil:
he benched the bow at that point and got to the end of the line.
it took a little time.
[bleep]
donaldson:
we're neck and neck!
[bleep]
man:
come on, cliff.
you got it, buddy.
oh [bleep] cliff and mike miss on their first attempts.
man #2:
nice!
man #3:
oh [bleep]
keep going.
but it's a target that they've already hit.
that won't count.
oh!
that one goes right in between the man:
there you go.
get back!
cliff goes right in between the targets for the red team.
man:
oh!
what was that?
that one skips off the target.
man #2:
come on, gary.
man #3:
yes!
off the line!
donaldson:
red team leads, 3 to 2.
dustin has one more arrow.
phil's already back up.
ohh, that one goes low.
man:
all right, i'm close, man.
phil goes just over.
man:
oh!
man #2:
good job.
jake sticks another one.
jake is 2 for 2.
alex back on the course, going toe-to-toe with chris.
man:
it's all right.
we're all tied up, 3 targets apiece.
ohh!
and missed it.
man #2:
there you go.
here it comes.
let's go!
let's go, baby!
chris sticks one.
red team takes the lead.
man:
nice!
man:
there you go.
alex ties it up.
we are neck and neck!
cliff taking on big mike.
man #3:
come on, cliff!
mike goes just low.
gary:
i'm hoping that cliff can get up there and just let his instincts take over, and maybe he'll make it happen.
aw [bleep]
so now we're back to the beginning of the lineup, and we're gonna start this thing over from tied.
donaldson:
dustin's back on the course for the blue team.
man:
oh, that was close.
man #2:
yeah!
gary sticks it for the red team.
red team has one target left!
man #3:
it's all you, phil.
man #4:
ohh!
come on around.
man #5:
oh, that one goes just south.
man #6:
oh!
that's all right.
get another one loaded up.
it's jake back up.
jake carrying the weight for the blue team.
man:
nice!
jake went 3 for 3.
it was a real good run.
man #2:
oh!
come on.
let's go!
man #3:
chris, you got it.
man #4:
there you go.
let's go.
donaldson:
alex is back up.
both teams have one target left.
alex... waiting on it.
he misses.
it's anybody's game at this point.
man:
come on, chris!
one target left.
oh, come on, one more.
get it up.
whose target is gonna come up first?
alex takes a shot.
goes just left.
man:
wait for it to come around.
alex misses with his three.
man:
that's it, man.
man #2:
ohh!
mike's back up for the blue team.
[bleep]
man:
oh!
man #2:
come on.
get back!
chris just missed.
go, go, go, go, go!
come on, you [bleep]
it's all you, cliff!
phil:
at this point of the competition, each team has one target left, and we have both of the worst archers from each team up.
[bleep]
man:
have to pull it, mike!
have to pull!
come on, cliff!
get him out of there!
send it!
yeah!
that's it...
blue team wins!
yes!
hughes:
i hear this stick, like the sinking sound of victory.
so, yeah, it felt good.
i mean, it [chuckles]...
it gave me a pretty strong rush.
donaldson:
blue team, congratulations.
you guys win the challenge.
you are safe.
red team, you got a couple hours to decide which two of you will face off in the elimination challenge.
i'll see you later at the nomination range.
all of you can head back to the house.
hughes:
granted, i shot nine arrows.
you know, i'm not robin hood or anything like that.
i got lucky, but, you know, you just take the wins when you can.
this is "top shot." i mean, anything can happen.
cliff:
after the challenge is over, i know i'm going.
i mean, i wouldn't have it any other way.
i didn't perform.
i have to go.
the hard part is, who else is gonna go?
that's gonna be really tough.
donaldson:
coming up on "top shot"...
knowing that one of us is gonna go home, it's kind of a big blow.
if i look at you... who the [bleep] are you yelling at?
don't yell at me.
the [bleep] is wrong with you?
what you gonna do?
i'm not...
the [bleep] are you gonna do, mike?
jake performed very well today, and i'm excited at this point.
i mean, it's a real victory.
it's a real success.
we pulled the "w," and that's what counts.
nice job, guys.
yeah, with the [bleep] bow and arrow, i dominated.
you [bleep] don't think i can do anything.
that's all right, though.
hug.
[ speaks indistinctly ]
it was close, man.
it was so close.
and the fact that jake went 3 for 3 is like... oh, my god.
that's frustrating.
it is the most frustrating thing that i've ever dealt with in my life.
collins:
looking around the room, i know that i've picked the other three individuals out as the strongest shooters.
so knowing that one of us is gonna go home is kind of a big blow to all of us.
we know that it's gonna be...
it's gonna be tough.
it's on me, man.
i couldn't hit one.
i didn't... didn't deliver anything.
the hard thing is gonna be, who else, you know?
right.
i'm sorry i had to drag us down.
you know, gary has performed the best out of this team for the entire competition.
so it came down to chris and phil.
phil:
well, i hit one.
chris had a brain fart.
then that's the different...
you know, you count hits on target... he beat me.
man:
yeah, but...
i'm willing to go, if no one else is, either way.
so am i...
either way, you know?
well, i mean...
i don't know.
that hopes the strong guys go away so that i don't have to face them.
i'd rather go out, you know, guns blazing against the absolute best, and that's the way i hope this works out.
jake:
i still have hard feelings, 'cause all three of you voted for me, and put billy into elimination when he volunteered to go.
dustin:
okay.
well, let's really just put this behind us, though.
i mean, really, it's two things back, and we're still a team, and we got to perform as a team.
dustin:
right after we win, jake's all mad.
can't cope with having been sent to elimination.
by his reasoning, he shouldn't go.
it's not personal at all, you know?
and if i make mental mistakes ... but it is, it is.
jake:
all i'm pissed about, mike, is that [bleep] billy volunteered to go and didn't end up in [bleep] place.
hughes:
he vents that, like, he was mad.
he didn't think he should have gone.
so, obviously, there's issues that are unresolved.
it's nothing personal.
whatever, dude.
it is personal, 'cause you sent...
you didn't send a [bleep] that had a worse performance and volunteered to [bleep] go.
how is that anything but personal, mike?
because i think billy's overall fundamentals just looked better.
get the [bleep] out of here.
what had he [bleep] done?
if we make an assessment of each other, we can't get this personal about it.
we got to, like, listen and respect each other...
well, here's my [bleep] thing...
you [bleep] ain't gonna keep sending me to elimination and not have [bleep] recourse for it.
that's what i'm saying.
but there's a point where you just need to catch on and say,
there's no use.
were your feelings hurt?
no, the [bleep] volunteered to go, mike!
all i'm saying is [bleep] y'all.
that's all i'm saying, mike.
alex:
i think jake solves problems like a grade-schooler.
and i think all of us would want to be the guy because of his unsportsmanlike conduct.
that is the attitude which causes us to be like,
well, for sure, he's gonna go to elimination.
well [bleep] you send me to elimination with no just cause.
i think it was just cause.
hughes:
i'm trying to just listen and then communicate, so everything really death-spiraled from there.
you're talking around in circles.
none of it makes any sense.
first, you say, "it's performance-driven.
hughes:
you...
we sent you there based on performance.
jake, you came into this show knowing there's elimination challenges and knowing it's not a perfect science and knowing that you may have to get sent...
and knowing now... and the fact that you are all wired up about this is not showing maturity.
if i look at you...
not showing turity?
if i look at you... who the [bleep] are you yelling at?
don't yell at me.
the [bleep] is wrong with you?
what you gonna do?
i'm not...
the [bleep] you gonna do?
go ahead and do it.
jake, i'm not...
go ahead and do it, mike!
keep shaking!
go ahead!
i'm in full [bleep] control here!
man:
jake.
the [bleep] you gonna do?
nothing.
take your best shot!
i'm not gonna do anything.
take your best shot!
i'm not gonna do anything.
go ahead!
guys.
keep running your [bleep] mouth about performance.
i'm not running my mouth.
you're running your [bleep] mouth, mike!
i'm not gonna...
we're not gonna [bleep] fight.
go ahead, man.
go ahead.
you're just running your [bleep] mouth...
listen, jake.
no, there is no [bleep] "listen.
[bleep] ridiculous.
dustin:
i think jake's a coward, and i think the only way he's gonna get eliminate mike is by a technicality, if he gets mike to throw a punch at him or something.
i think...
i think that was going through his head.
and he almost got there.
and the bottom line is, if i can get rid of people without going to elimination round...
all i got to do is get them to punch me... it's an easy day.
hughes:
it got bad.
i lost my temper.
i cooled down, thinking, like,
why am i lowering myself to this level?
jake's disrespecting this competition.
he's disrespecting the competitors.
or his ability to take any kind of criticism.
so we'll just... we'll just continue the best we can and compete the best we can.
jake:
everything i do is extremely calculated.
you know, you can look at all the past leaders of the world, no, they just saw more than the average human being was able to see.
you look at attila the hun...
you know, he's still famous, thousands of years later, because he was so cruel.
he also conquered half the known world at the time.
so you can say whatever you want to say about my tactics...
yes, they're unconventional.
but that's why i am who i am.
that's why i win the way i win.
that's why i always achieve what i set out to achieve.
'cause i don't do what everybody else does...
i don't play the normal party line.
gary:
walking into the nomination range today just looking up there at that rack and seeing four targets there...
it kind of really sinks in as to how far you've gone in this competition.
donaldson:
red team, welcome back to the nomination range.
all right, let's get to it, gentlemen.
[ gunshot ]
gary:
unfortunately, you know,
cliff hasn't exactly proven himself to be the strongest archer in the group, so my bullet goes into cliff's target.
cliff:
it came down to chris and phil,
cliff and chris, you each have one vote.
chris, your turn.
[ gun cocks ]
collins:
based on performance shooting the recurve bow...
i know that i can't vote for myself...
so it's obviously got to go to cliff.
all right, phil.
phil:
chris volunteered himself, and i give him a lot of credit to do that.
good luck to the both of you.
thanks, phil.
phil:
it's not, you know, one of my proudest moments to have to shoot chris' target, knowing how good of a shooter he is and feeling that i didn't perform up to my expectations today.
cliff and chris, you two will face off in the elimination challenge tomorrow.
if you lose the elimination challenge, you are out of the competition.
it's part of the game.
it's what we signed up for.
collins:
i came here to shoot, i want to shoot, and finally, i feel like i'm getting my chance it would be an honor to send cliff home, and it would be an honor to be sent home by cliff.
either way, i'm happy with it.
all right, thanks, colby.
be a good battle.
absolutely, man.
absolutely.
donaldson:
coming up on "top shot"...
cliff: "holy crap.
now i got to shoot something that's moving.
either one of us could walk away with the win.
cliff and chris, welcome to practice for the elimination challenge.
once again...
you'll be using the recurve bow.
in the team challenge, you learned to ricochet your arrows into a target.
direct hits were not permitted.
but in the elimination challenge, direct hits are exactly what you'll be working on.
chris palmer is back to help teach you this new skill.
you'll practice separately.
cliff, you're up first.
and you throw a football pretty good?
sure.
okay.
well, it's basically the same thing...
that's why it's all instinct.
you know, you don't have sights when you're throwing a football, right?
right.
palmer:
our contestants today are gonna have to learn how to shoot an arrow instinctively into a moving target that's going from side to side.
your weapon, sir.
[ chuckling ] okay.
thank you.
i think, "holy crap.
i could barely shoot the arrows off the ramp
that was standing still.
now i got to shoot something that's moving?
this is not gonna be good.
i whacked the crap out of my arm.
did you hear that sound?
yeah.
no, i heard it.
palmer:
i'm gonna have cliff just start out shooting a stationary target, 'cause he's never done this before.
i can't get my arm right.
now.
boom!
right out of the gate, he hit the bull's-eye, so i was quite impressed.
thought this was hard, man.
if i just could have done that yesterday,
i wouldn't be standing here.
all right, you want to...
want to try to move it?
so, how far should i lead with that speed?
oh, you definitely want to...
just... if you're going for the yellow...
cliff:
right.
cliff:
as far as the moving target, you just have to aim at the edge of the target...
not ahead of it, but just a little bit ahead of the bull's-eye.
[ taps ]
oh, just ahead.
i hit my arm again.
ohh.
tried to go too quick.
take your time.
yeah.
i'd rather you slow down a little bit and get it right.
you know, i'm bumping it forward with my finger.
there you go.
i'm getting the hang of it.
you're getting it.
you know, it's just a matter for me of maintaining the fundamentals and just doing everything right each time, which means i have to slow down.
if i get in a rush, i'm gonna make mistakes.
focus.
that one actually felt really good.
palmer:
what surprises me about cliff during this is that he's actually quite calm.
like any competition, if you're calm and collected and you know what you're doing and you stick with it, you'll succeed.
[ taps ]
hit the crap out of my arm with that one.
hey, you hit your arm, but you hit the target.
good enough.
hi, chris.
how you doing?
doing well.
we'll find out soon.
[ sighs ] held it too long.
time and release.
i noticed, when you were pulling back, you're shaking like that...
this arm is.
uh-huh.
so, that could be why you're throwing them off, too...
as you're letting go, you're moving the bow from shaking.
so it sounds like i need to time the release better.
but due to the fact that his hands are shaking, he's missing that target.
palmer:
as you pull back, try to release as you're getting to the point.
okay.
okay?
see how that works for you.
that's the way i shoot it.
yeah.
all right.
collins:
what i found to be the most important is the point of release...
when i hit my stopping point, releasing right then, not pausing, even for a split second.
go.
good one.
it's kind of like throwing a football.
you don't pause right before the release... you just whip it.
don't get your hands shaking during the heat of competition, and i think you'll do just fine.
okay.
i'm not the greatest archer in the world, but i know that cliff isn't, either, and i feel fairly confident.
i think speed is gonna be critical in this, whatever it is.
i think there's gonna be a lot of arrows sent flying.
and we'll... we'll see how it goes.
cliff:
shooting is a sport.
it's like golf, where it's all about doing the same thing exactly the same over and over again, repetitively, to be consistent.
and you never stop learning.
there's always something else that you can do better.
in this competition, you have to learn quick.
so this will be a good test of how much i learned over the last three days.
collins:
after my time in the marine corps,
i became a firearms instructor.
i live in tulsa, oklahoma.
and i'm married.
i have a 4-year-old named liberty
i feel very strong about the second amendment.
that i got it tattooed on my forearm.
i feel like it's one of the things and then i got, you know, a little revolver tattooed here on my arm just to remind me of, i guess, the way of the gun.
being only 25 years old, very limited experience in the shooting world...
i'm used to that.
so i look forward to the chance to prove myself yet again and beat cliff.
walking into today's elimination challenge,
i see big metal towers and cables back and forth, our targets are gonna be going back and forth along those cables.
red team, welcome to the "top shot" elimination challenge.
cliff and chris, in respect to this competition, this is do-or-die time for you guys.
for this challenge, you will once again be using the recurve bow.
this will be a timed, side-by-side challenge that will show us exactly how skilled you've become with the bow.
20 yards out on the range are two towers.
connecting them are four wires with targets hanging at different heights.
on my "go," the four 18-inch targets are gonna begin to move back and forth between the towers at different speeds.
one half of each target is orange.
you'll each be assigned a color.
whoever gets the most hits on his target in 3 1/2 minutes wins.
the loser is eliminated.
but realize this... if you hit your opponent's color, you're gonna give him a free point.
all right, cliff, you're gonna be orange.
chris, you are yellow.
chris has, you know, shot one most of his life, so he definitely has the advantage.
but, i mean, i don't feel like i'm out of it, but i definitely feel like i'm the underdog.
collins:
cliff's obviously got a very good record in elimination challenges.
this will be his third time.
he's came back both previous times, but i do feel confident in my abilities, and i think that there's a reasonable chance that either one of us could walk away with the win.
donaldson:
coming up on "top shot"...
that's a point for chris!
cliff nails it!
i put an arrow on his target.
so i'm certainly not helping myself here.
donaldson:
now we're tied up!
cliff and chris, this is a timed, side-by-side challenge.
using a recurve bow, you'll have 3 1/2 minutes to fire your arrows at four moving targets as they're passing from you 20 yards down range.
cliff, you'll be shooting at the orange half of the targets.
chris, you're gonna take out the yellow.
the marksman who sticks the most targets wins and avoids elimination.
loser says "adiós" to any chance of winning "top shot
and the 100 grand that goes with it.
the winner... also gonna receive a $2,000 gift card all right, guys, this is live.
archers, ready...
set...
go!
targets already out on the range.
oh!
that's a point for chris.
oh!
chris misses to the left.
cliff misses to the right.
cliff... still waiting to get on the board.
there's a lot of time and plenty of arrows, but only the ones that hit count, so i'm gonna take it slow and steady.
man:
there you go!
cliff's on the board!
we're tied up, 1 point apiece!
man #2:
it is crazy.
cliff gets another point!
now chris scores!
we're tied up again, 2 to 2!
chris sticks one on his target.
chris leads, 3 to 2.
oh!
chris hits one of cliff's targets.
now we're tied up.
thanks, buddy.
chris leads, 4 to 3.
cliff nails it!
chris hits another target.
we're now 5-4.
chris leads.
collins:
aah.
clock is ticking.
both men very accurate.
chris scores again.
chris leads, 6-4.
cliff got to make up some ground here.
chris sticks another one.
cliff goes wide right.
still plenty of time for cliff to catch up.
[ arrow fires ] man #2:
ohh!
oh!
chris' nicks the top of the target.
it does not stick.
cliff sticks another one!
i gave yours it back, dude.
oh!
cliff sticks one in chris' target.
gonna be a point for chris.
chris sticks another one.
cliff goes just high.
chris sends another one down.
that will count as a point.
chris loaded up again.
chris scores another point.
[bleep]
it's yellow.
cliff sticks one in the yellow.
that's gonna give chris a point.
right after that, chris sticks another one in his target.
chris sticks another one.
cliff gets a point on the board!
cliff scores another point!
collins:
ah!
oh!
collins:
so, cliff starts to catch up, and i put an arrow in his target.
so i'm certainly not helping myself here.
now chris hits one in the orange.
cliff sticks another one!
cliff making up tons of ground here at the end of the challenge!
oh!
chris hits one!
time!
cease fire!
good shooting, guys.
very good.
nice work!
yeah, man.
good job.
collins:
i know it's over.
i can't do anything else.
i really don't know whether i've won or not, but, you know, i'm good with it either way.
cliff, you stuck 10 arrows...
nice work.
thank you.
chris, you stuck 15 arrows.
congratulations.
you win.
you are still in the running for the $100,000 prize and the title of "top shot.
nice shooting, buddy.
thank you.
appreciate it.
been a pleasure, man.
thank you.
same here.
chris, come on down.
grab your gift card.
you can rejoin your team.
collins:
it was a good feeling to win, good feeling to know that i'm going back to the house and i'm still in the running.
thanks.
appreciate it.
yep, yep.
you know, i also feel bad to be sending a real good shooter home, but that's the nature of the beast.
good shooting, man.
thank you.
and i came out victorious.
i'm happy about that.
donaldson:
cliff, unfortunately, you have fired your last shot.
you have been eliminated from "top shot.
come on down here to say goodbye to these guys on your way out.
cliff:
you know, to win "top shot,
you have to be great at everything.
and, of course, the bow got me.
i mean, my arm is destroyed.
i'm [chuckles]...
i'm quitting bow competition.
i'm retiring officially right here.
all right, guys, good luck.
hey, man, good shooting with you.
appreciate it.
chris.
it's been an honor.
chris, honor, too, man.
phil.
been a pleasure.
good luck, guys.
make sure one of you guys takes this home.
we will.
all right, man.
cliff:
i had a great time on "top shot.
i met a lot of great people.
i did a lot of neat stuff
i would never have got a chance to do.
it was, you know, the most fun you can have with a gun...
or a bow.
well, gentlemen, there are seven of you guys, all one step closer to taking that grand prize, the $100,000 and the title of history's "top shot.
you can head back to the house.
i'll see you tomorrow morning at practice.
all right.
good job, chris.
thank you.
appreciate it, colby.
donaldson:
on the next episode of "top shot"...
it's time for the green jerseys.
yeah!
all right!
the individual stage of the competition begins.
gary:
me making the green team is a lot like getting promoted at work.
man:
mcmillan tac-50.
donaldson:
the largest-caliber rifle yet puts the shooters to the test.
this thing kicks like a three-legged ninja.
donaldson:
and a new level of excellence will decide who stays in the game.
that's a hit!
__file_terminal__
narrator:
there is a crisis in forensic science.
the most trusted crime fighting tools responsible for hundreds of thousands of convictions, may not be as bulletproof as once thought.
there's a laundry list of forensic techniques that are now scrutinized.
narrator:
fingerprints may not be as unique as we thought.
nobody's ever questioned fingerprints before.
narrator:
and decades-old techniques like blood spatter analysis and bite mark comparisons are being exposed as more art than science.
killers are walking free, and innocent people are going to prison.
i don't belong here.
i'm innocent.
narrator:
can new technologies help put the science back in forensic science?
now, researchers and crime scene investigators venture into the not-so-distant future where avatar detectives enter murder scenes to witness the moment of death.
we can see the body on the floor.
narrator:
forensic engineers make identifications from fingerints of glass.
and coroners conduct virtual autopsies, peeling back layers of 3d victims, exposing once undetectable evidence of murder.
now, nova puts forensics under the microscope to see how good science can go bad and how to make getting away with murder a thing of the past.
right now on nova-- "forensics on trial.
♪ nova 40x02 ♪ forensics on trial original air date on october 17, 2012
 sync, corrected by elderman 
major funding for nova is provided by the following...
narrator:
march 11, 2004.
7:30 a.m.
rush hour.
ten bombs rip through madrid's crowded commuter trains.
191 people are killed, more than 1,800 wounded.
it is the worst terror attack in spain's history and bears the hallmarks of al qaeda.
reporter:
the scale of these attacks has horrified spain.
soft targets chosen, no warnings given.
narrator:
the international manhunt that follows triggers a crisis in forensic science that will shake it to its very foundation.
reporter: ...knew about the shoddy work of the fbi special agent.
narrator:
forensic techniques trusted by police for over 100 years are shown to be dangerously flawed.
reporter:
...served 18 years in prison for a murder he did not commit.
narrator:
killers are walking free while innocent people are sent to prison, and even death row.
man:
this was a gross perversion of justice.
narrator:
the investigation to find the madrid bomber sends shockwaves through the forensic community.
and it all starts here.
in a commuter parking lot ten stations away from where the bomb went off, spanish police find a van.
inside is a blue plastic bag containing bomb-making materials.
it could be a huge break.
it's possible fingerprints have been left behind on the bag itself.
the idea that every person's fingerprint is unique has been a foundation of forensic investigation for over 100 years.
but this case poses a potential challenge.
the lines and ridges that form the distinctive patterns of fingerprints left on evidence are created from sweat and oil.
a print left on plastic, like the bag recovered in madrid, can be easily wiped off or distorted.
mark acree is a former fbi fingerprint analyst.
plastic bags by their very nature are nonporous.
the fingerprint is sitting on the surface, and it's very vulnerable to being smeared or smudged.
narrator:
but there are established ways to recover prints from nonporous surfaces.
evidence ranging from gun handles to keys to plastic bags are placed in an airtight chamber.
inside, a chemical called cyanoacrylate, more commonly known as superglue, is heated up.
its vapors coat the sweat and oil of the print with a sticky white residue, making the print visible.
but it does have limitations.
superglue chemically alters the lines of sweat and oil and can even obscure details of a print's unique pattern.
using this method,
spanish investigators recover a partial print on the bag.
they rush digital photos to forensic labs across the globe, including the fbi.
examiners first need to determine if there are enough lines and details in the ridges for a clear comparison.
ridge details are broken down into distinctive shapes, like dots, that look like islands, endings, where ridgelines terminate, and intersecting lines called bifurcations.
from the madrid bomber's print, the fbi is able to zero in on seven unique traits for comparison.
now they look for a match.
acree:
they take the image, they encode it, and then it's launched against this database.
narrator:
from over 47 million criminals, federal employees, military personnel and people of national security interest, the fbi's supercomputer identifies 20 prints that contain some of the same distinctive traits as the madrid print.
examiners require that 12 unique traits correspond to declare a match.
the fbi identifies one of the 20 prints that actually shares 15 traits in common with the one found in madrid.
it comes from the left index finger of this man, a 37-year-old former u.s. army lieutenant... and a convert to islam,
brandon mayfield.
as a lawyer now living in portland, oregon,
mayfield recently represented a convicted terrorist.
the fbi sneaks into his home while he's at work... taps his phones, collects samples for dna and watches his wife and children.
on may 6, 2004, just two months after the bombing, the fbi moves in.
mayfield:
they pushed their way into my office.
they took my hands behind my back, and they handcuffed me.
i didn't know what they were searching and arresting me for.
they never told me.
narrator:
this fingerprint match sparks the arrest of american brandon mayfield as the bomber responsible for the murder of nearly 200 people-- spain's 9/11.
reporter:
a fingerprint top counterterrorism officials now tell newsweek magazine is a, quote,
absolutely incontrovertible match
to portland attorney brandon mayfield.
narrator:
mayfield insists on his innocence.
he hires his own fingerprint analyst to testify at a pretrial hearing.
the expert's testimony is not what mayfield expects.
he sd, "it's a match.
that's when i knew the train to a death penalty had just pulled out of the station.
narrator:
federal agents take mayfield back to jail to await trial.
hours later, half a world away,
spanish investigators make a stunning discovery that changes brandon mayfield's life.
i was told that the spanish police had found that this fingerprint belonged to an algerian;
that it wasn't me.
narrator:
spanish police determine that the fingerprint belongs to this man
ouhnane daoud, a known terrorist.
reporter:
news from spain.
a fingerprint found on a bag linked to the madrid train attacks belongs to an algerian national, not brandon mayfield.
narrator:
mayfield is released from jail after 15 days.
now the question on everyone's mind is, how could this misidentification happen?
it's a question that will eventually make its way to the united states congress.
the similarity between mayfield's print and the bomber's is undeniable.
it challenges a century-old pillar of forensic science-- that no two prints are identical.
acree:
we always assumed that fingerprints are very, very unique.
but what the mayfield case demonstrates is that parts of a fingerprint can be so similar that it's possible for two people to be identified to one latent print.
narrator:
the u.s. congress calls on the national academy of sciences, the nation's most prestigious research institution, to conduct an investigation into all forensic technologies and techniques.
in july 2009, they release their report.
in short, they find there's not enough science in forensic science.
the big news was that forensic science was fractured.
narrator:
jessica gabel is a professor of law and frequently lectures on the nas findings.
it lacks the rigors, the standards, the quality controls and procedures that we find usually in science.
and in that light, forensic science actually can sometimes contribute to wrongful convictions.
narrator:
the madrid bomber case is a perfect storm of forensic flaws.
only a partial print is recovered on a plastic surface, and that is eventually distorted.
there is also a surprising similarity between parts of mayfield's print and the real bomber's.
together these could have led to the conviction of an innocent man.
can modern science prevent this from happening again?
the answer is deceptively simple-- examiners need a way to expose more of fingerprints' unique details.
i was talking to dr. shaler...
narrator:
akhlesh lakhtakia and his team at penn state university's materials research institute are eyeing a new technology that promises to do just that.
his project got wings from a fly.
a fly's ability to elude capture fascinated lakhtakia since he was a boy.
before you can approach the fly, the fly has seen you somehow or the other, and has flown off.
narrator:
lakhtakia wonders if the structure of the fly's eye gives it a unique ability to see predators approaching from all angles.
to find out, he turns to an ultrathin material called ctf
columnar thin film-- to make an impression of the minutest contours of the fly's cornea.
each square inch of the film contains billions of glass bristles.
it forms a layer 200 times thinner than a sheet of paper.
when it coats the fly's eye, the bristles conform to every peak and valley.
the result is that microscopic nooks and crannies show up in stunning three-dimensional detail.
the technology isn't helping lakhtakia catch flies.
but it does give him an idea for how to catch criminals.
could this technology be used to get the same incredible detail from a fingerprint?
this film would reproduce the topographic features, the geography, if you will, of the ridges in the fingerprint.
narrator:
if ctf can capture a fingerprint, it could revolutionize forensics.
but will it work?
the team places a fingerprint on a glass slide.
the slide is loaded into a chamber called a thermal evaporator.
inside the evaporator, the fingerprint is sprayed with a microscopically thin layer of vaporized glass.
unlike superglue, the glass does not chemically alter the oils that form the print.
after about 30 minutes, the glass bristles harden into an ultrathin film that preserves minute details.
even with the naked eye, the ctf print reveals ridges that would be missing in a superglue print.
with the new technique, the ridges are far more prominent.
lakhtakia:
you can see creases.
like, this is a crease.
this is a crease.
this is another crease.
narrator:
under a microscope, there are exponentially more ridgelines.
with this technique, examiners in the madrid bombing case could have had more points for comparison and a better chance to match the fingerprint to the real bomber.
the ctf fingerprint technique is currently being reviewed for use in the field.
but fingerprint analysis is not alone on the list of forensic disciplines currently under the microscope.
there's a laundry list of forensic techniques that are now scrutinized based on the nas report-- bite mark evidence, footwear impressions.
there's no real science behind it as much as it's just trying to match patterns.
narrator:
and if that matching process goes bad, people's lives are changed forever.
may 23, 1991.
2:10 a.m.
in a rural community outside syracuse, new york, police and firefighters rush to a blaze at a farmhouse.
coe ecker:
flames shooting up the front of the house.
beautiful big two-story farmhouse.
narrator:
the occupant of the home, 49-year-old sabina kulakowski, is missing.
ecker:
i took on deputy, and we went up this laneway, worked our way up to about here.
she was nude.
just about totally covered with blood.
she had been stabbed numerous times.
narrator:
a distinctive bruise catches his eye.
we noticed a bite mark on the side of the body.
narrator:
but it gets worse.
at the autopsy,
ecker sees bite marks on her breast, belly and back.
ecker:
we discovered that there was at least four more sets of bite marks.
narrator:
these marks could be the key to identifying sabina's killer.
dr. lowell levine is a leading expert on forensic dentistry.
levine:
the teeth cause a pattern injury in skin.
the person will actually close their teeth down on some tissue.
so a bite mark is really a bruise.
and it's basically a bruise with patterning.
narrator:
bite mark forensics is based on the idea that everyone's teeth create distinctive patterns.
to find a match, forensic dentists, or odontologists, make a wax impression of a suspect's teeth.
then they try to match the pattern made by the size, shape and spacing of the teeth on the wax impression to a photo of the bruise on the skin of the victim.
levine:
what we're basically doing is looking for similar characteristics in similar locations.
narrator:
in the murder of sabina kulakowski, it doesn't take long to find a suspect to compare for a match.
investigators learn that six days before the murder, a hard-drinking 31-year-old is released from prison.
his name is roy brown.
after a cayuga county, new york, social service agency takes away his daughter, he threatens a massacre.
what was said was, "what do you want?
do you want me to come down there and open up on you all with an uzi?
narrator:
sabina kulakowski worked at the cayuga county social service agency.
police interviews with brown's ex-wives reveal a bombshell-- when he gets mad, he bites.
brown denies involvement in the killing.
brown:
i gave them all kinds of samples and tests to show it's not me.
i gave them all kinds of hair samples, saliva samples, blood samples, you name it.
narrator:
he allows authorities to take a wax impression of his teeth.
it reveals a distinctive pattern.
brown is missing two teeth.
this leaves wide gaps in the wax impression.
the bruise on the victim should have the same gaps that correspond to brown's missing teeth.
but it only has a gap on the right side.
it appears brown's teeth don't match the evidence.
the forensic odontologist examines the bite pattern evidence.
he thinks it shows that brown bit down and, like a pit bull, twisted his mouth into the victim's skin, obscuring any gap on the left side.
based on his interpretation of the bite marks, he declares a match.
police charge brown with first-degree murder.
i said, "you're making a real serious mistake.
it ain't my teeth, man.
and they said, "well, we got confidence in our dentist.
and that was it.
narrator:
a jury finds roy brown guilty.
he's sentenced to 25 years to life.
brown spends the next 15 years in jail trying to prove his innocence.
brown:
i don't belong here, you know?
i'm innocent.
i turned my cell into an office, became my own attorney.
narrator:
brown pores over every scrap of evidence.
11 years into his sentence, he finds a clue.
it's a statement taken from one of the firefighters on the night of the murder.
the firefighter's name is barry bench.
he's the former brother-in-law of the victim.
they were fighting over her possession of his family's farmhouse.
transcripts reveal that police questioned bench is whereabouts the night of the murder.
brown finds something suspicious in bench's statement.
brown:
he says, "i left in my 1983 datsun century car
and went to jake's tavern.
i stayed there until 12:30 or 1:00.
narrator:
bench states he then drove home.
but to brown, something doesn't add up.
he has to drive right by his family farm-- the house that's in flames.
you're going to tell me in the middle of the dark night, a gigantic ball of fire that big is just burning away, and he doesn't notice it or stop or anything?
and he's a fireman.
narrator:
brown sends bench a letter on december 24, 2003.
he accuses bench of murder.
well, christmas is tomorrow.
my gift to you is, mark my words
they will eventually find out about your guilt.
have a merry christmas but don't count on a happy new year.
and i sent it out to him.
and i got a hell of a response.
narrator:
five days later,
barry bench lays down in front of an amtrak train.
police become suspicious and decide to compare bench's dna to saliva recovered on the victim's t-shirt found at the crime scene.
they match with almost 100% certainty.
still, the judge believes that the bite mark evidence is strong enough to keep brown in prison.
there is only one way for brown to prove his innocence-- exhume bench's body and compare his teeth to the marks left on the victim.
the case is assigned to dr. lowell levine at the new york state forensic science unit in albany.
he faces two key questions:
did roy brown do it?
and if not, who did?
first, levine reviews the forensic evidence that convicted roy brown.
he compares the bite marks on sabina kulakowski to the wax impression of brown's teeth.
i can positively tell you
roy brown didn't cause the bite mark on the skin.
levine:
there is no way that roy brown could have caused this area in here.
narrator:
while the right side of the bite mark has a space, the left side does not.
the bite mark evidence used to convict roy brown was based on an implausible interpretation.
it is impossible to get a marking if you don't have a tooth.
jessica gabel:
forensic bite mark evidence is more art than it is science.
there is a lot of varied interpretation that goes into that.
narrator:
one thing is clear
roy brown did not murder sabina kulakowski.
after 15 years in prison, 47-year-old roy brown is finally released.
he sues the state of new york and wins $2.6 million.
what about barry bench?
levine examines the teeth from barry bench's disinterred jaw.
but there's a problem.
trauma from the train injury and body decomposition from being buried limits levine's ability to make a bitemark analysis.
by looking at what we were able to find on mr. bench,
i can only tell you it's possible he could have caused the bite marks on ms. kulakowski.
narrator:
barry bench's badly deteriorated remains prevent levine from making a more definitive match.
the sabina kulakowski murder case is still open to this day.
so what if there were a way to perfectly preserve evidence, including bodies, and be able to access and examine them in a pristine state, no matter how much time passes?
in sweden that's already happening.
the corpse inside this body bag may be the victim of a crime.
it's what police suspect, but have no way to prove.
that's the job of dr. anders persson and his team.
they are about to perform an autopsy.
but this is no ordinary cut-open-the-cadaver job.
in sweden's center for medical image science and visualization, this man is about to be sliced up in a virtual autopsy.
it begins inside this ct scanner.
it's like an x-ray on steroids.
regular x-rays scan just the outline of bones.
but ct scans use a rotating x-ray.
it takes 12 images per second, creating cross-sectional slices of bone, thinner than a dime.
these image slices are stacked side by side, forming a stunning picture of a body's skeleton.
dr. persson's team also scans the body through an mri to search for evidence of damage to organs.
mris create a map of the body's tissue slice by slice, using powerful magnets and pulsing radio waves.
the victim is never removed from the body bag.
with the click of a mouse, the covering can be made invisible to get a virtual peek inside.
anders ynnerman:
what we're seeing here is the cadaver inside of the body bag.
and right here is the zipper of the body bag, which is obviously metal.
we have made everything else... the plastic of the bag is now transparent.
narrator:
the team merges the ct and mri data to produce a 3d model of the suspected murder victim.
now, the virtual autopsy begins.
persson:
i can use a virtual knife and go into the body.
we get rid of the soft tissue, and then i look for small fractures in the skeletons, and for small bleedings.
narrator:
some of these fractures and other evidence are invisible to the naked eye.
the most critical are gases.
gas is a huge problem when you do a normal autopsy.
we can't see it.
narrator:
gases escape the body as it's cut open in a standard autopsy.
but in the virtual corpse,
dr. persson can punch through the skin without releasing gases.
if he finds trapped gases inside, it could be a telltale sign of strangulation.
persson:
when you try to strangle someone, you squeeze your hands.
the pressure in the lungs goes up, the pressure in the trachea goes up, and the air goes out in the soft tissue.
narrator:
normally, air flows directly up and down the throat, or trachea.
but when a victim is strangled, the air is cut off and the pressure forces air outside the walls of the throat.
in the virtual autopsy, gases show up as blue.
dr. persson uses his digital scalpel to get a closer look.
in the soft tissue outside the trachea, he sees something suspicious.
he calls detective conny petterson, one of sweden's federal crime scene investigators.
persson:
there shouldn't be blue color outside the trachea.
that's not normal.
and it seems that it could be a strangulation.
narrator:
the virtual autopsy may have uncovered clues to a murder.
this technology is proving so effective,
dr. persson and his team at sweden's nearby interactive institute are designing a portable application.
called the virtual autopsy table, it's putting digital slice and dice at their fingertips.
thomas rydell:
when it comes to medical visualization, the user interaction design is really important.
what you want is an easy-to-use and simple system.
narrator:
it's like a giant ipad.
designer thomas rydell uses simple hand gestures to peel back skin, arteries or bone.
it fulfills the very meaning of the greek word autopsia
to see for oneself.
rydell:
right now we're looking at a woman who had a ruptured aneurism in the brain.
and then by rotating, we can look inside the brain.
so by just using simple gestures, you can control really advanced and huge medical data.
narrator:
and the team has created a dynamic way to share investigations visually... virtual autopsies in 3d.
ynnerman:
i can see a future when it will be a very powerful tool to show the findings in front of a jury or also during the investigation.
narrator:
no matter how long ago the crime, investigators will see the dead as clearly as the day they died.
but incredible as this technology is, many of the most trusted forensic disciplines come down to interpretation.
and with interpretation comes error.
human error touches every aspect of forensic science, because every aspect of forensic science requires a human interpretation.
narrator:
dr. robert shaler founded the forensics program at penn state.
he led the dna identification of the victims of 9/11 at the world trade center.
he is also one of the authors of the national academy of sciences' report.
i have to begin to question my own training, things that i've believed my entire career.
i agree with the national academy report.
we need to look at the scientific basis of these determinations.
narrator:
one area he is working to improve is blood pattern analysis-- an important and frequently used tool for crime scene investigators.
shaler created this "blood cottage.
here he simulates crimes, then applies rigorous analysis to the bloody mess.
he hits me, picks up a baseball bat.
narrator:
but this is difficult evidence to interpret.
he hits me a second time.
there's blood spatter on the wall.
narrator:
shaler and his colleagues invent violent scenarios of bashes and slashes.
using sheep's blood, shaler and his partner in crime,
ralph ristenbatt, carefully recreate a blood pattern from a knife wound to the neck and an impact blow from a baseball bat using a stand-in for a human skull-- the severed head of a pig.
it's the best thing short of actually hitting somebody.
narrator:
blood splatter seems helter-skelter to the untrained eye, but blood forms patterns in several ways-- drips from wounds, pools from blood draining from the body, spatter, the result of impact blows, and spurts from severed arteries.
examiners can use this evidence to recreate a crime step by step.
and it can even tell them the type of murder weapon used.
shaler:
because knives have very thin edges they have a tendency to produce these kinds of patterns.
so what we see here is an elongated droplet with a very thin point.
and we know that it's going from left to right because it's pointing in the direction that it's moving.
so what we'd like to do now is to...
narrator:
now shaler brings in future crime scene investigators to interpret the bloody mess.
that interpretation can mean the difference between a suspect's innocence or guilt.
katherine o'hanlon:
we can see that there are bubbles in the blood, which indicates that there's saliva in with it, which makes it seem that it came from the person's mouth.
narrator:
and analyzing the angle of the blood marks can help investigators pinpoint the location of each impact.
so we can infer that this came first, and then as the body fell to its final resting place, there was a second blow, and then the pool of blood.
narrator:
investigators reverse-engineer from the pool of blood to reconstruct the story of the crime-- exactly where the struggle took place, how many times the victim was hit, what kind of weapon was used, and the step-by-step movements of the killer.
but even the best-trained analyst can misread that story, especially if the evidence itself is compromised.
it's an alarmingly common problem which the nas says is caused by a lack of standard forensic practices.
nowhere has this issue received more attention than in one notorious case cited in their report.
on june 13, 1994, about 12:10 a.m., in an upscale los angeles neighborhood, these bloody paw prints of a dog lead police to the site of a horrific crime scene.
detectives discover the body of a woman in a black dress.
her throat is slit so deeply, her head is nearly decapitated.
it is nicole brown simpson, the estranged wife of football legend o.j. simpson.
her friend ronald goldman lies nearby, stabbed more than 20 times.
making sense of this crime scene is a challenge.
and this investigation is compromised before it even starts.
dozens of police and reporters roam through the crime scene, smearing the blood and tracking it with their feet.
the forensic team finds several shoe prints, but there's no way to tell which prints belong to police and which belong to the killer.
renowned forensic investigator dr. henry lee is one of the expert witnesses during the trial.
he believes any blood pattern evidence found at this murder scene is rendered useless.
once you step on the bloodstain, you change the pattern now.
narrator:
the contamination of the crime scene and evidence only gets worse.
just before 5:00 a.m., detectives race to o.j. simpson's home, two miles away.
simpson is not there.
a houseguest lets police in.
in o.j.'s bedroom they find crucial evidence-- this pair of dark socks.
forensic examiners at the lapd find four bloodstains on the socks.
two located near the calf area.
one is the ankle area, and the other one near the toe area.
narrator:
through dna, a person's genetic fingerprint, the lab finds that three of the bloodstains belong to o.j. simpson and the fourth belongs to nicole simpson.
lee:
that's very crucial for the case.
why?
because that's a direct linkage.
puts o.j. simpson, suspect's, socks at the scene, and victim's blood somehow transferred to the socks.
narrator:
dna, when properly analyzed, is the most scientifically sound forensic evidence.
matching a suspect's dna to evidence like blood found at a crime scene gives police near statistical certainty that they have the right person.
dna is based on hard science.
there is chemistry, there is biology, there is math involved with it.
the nas report singled out dna as this pillar of what the other parts of forensic science should inspire and ascribe to be.
narrator:
nicole brown simpson's dna found on the socks in o.j.'s bedroom is crucial evidence used to link him to the crime.
police arrest him for the double murders of nicole brown simpson and ronald goldman.
simpson' s trial lasts more than nine months-- the longest in california history.
jurors make their decision in just four hours.
juror:
we the jury in the above entitled action find the defendant, orenthal james simpson, not guilty of the crime of murder in violation of penal code section 187a...
narrator:
it is a stunning and, some say, shocking verdict.
dna on the sock irrefutably links simpson to the victim.
even dr. henry lee,
simpson's defense team's chief forensic scientist, admits that.
so how did the jury find him not guilty?
the o.j. case really revealed the problems that can happen before the evidence ever gets to the lab.
narrator:
the o.j. defense team casts doubt on nearly every piece of evidence, illustrating how police contaminated the crime scene, and suggesting even worse-- actually planting evidence to frame simpson.
dr. lee points out clothing the lapd presented from simpson's bedroom.
well, let's bring two pictures up.
you see a suspender.
and the suspender actually runs over the end of the bed near the box spring.
but you have a second picture.
the suspender actually stopped next to the bed, did not go over.
so of course, this obviously tells us somebody moved the suspender.
narrator:
the moving suspender is one of many contamination problems.
more critical are the bloody socks that directly link simpson and the murder victim through dna.
this lapd photo shows the socks on the floor.
but testimony from a police videographer claims earlier in the day there were no socks.
how can the socks be there at 4:35 when you just saw they're not there at 4:13?
narrator:
o.j.'s defense team suggested the lapd put the blood on the socks and planted them.
who's fooling whom here?
narrator:
the legitimacy of other evidence is also questioned.
this bloody envelope was moved.
a crucial fingerprint on this gate was lost.
shoeprint evidence was not collected properly.
time after time the defense put the evidence, not o.j. simpson, on trial.
i think it's absolutely a question of how the evidence was handled.
the prosecution simply couldn't prove beyond a reasonable doubt that o.j. simpson committed that crime.
it's a classic case study in what can go wrong with evidence.
narrator:
beyond the question of o.j. simpson's innocence or guilt, the nas report suggests justice cannot be served if the crime scene is compromised.
but what if police had a tool that could create a digital clone of the crime scene, a perfect record to eliminate any doubt about evidence being moved or contaminated?
well, here they do.
when we come into the house, we find a victim who is laying down on the kitchen floor.
there's a large amount of blood around the head area.
from the amount of trauma that we see on the body and the amount of blood evidence that we see on the walls, we have evidence of a struggle.
narrator:
detective jeff locklear starts piecing clues together.
the landlord of this abandoned house, who discovered the body, heard rumors of a squatter and came to check it out.
through the window of the back door he says he may have seen the killer.
when i heard the scuffling and saw the guy run out...
our witness says that he came in through this door, and then he saw the suspect flee through that window.
and then he looks down and he sees a body right here on the inside of the kitchen, just inside this wall.
narrator:
sorting this one out will be messy.
but, thankfully, none of this is real.
it's a simulated crime scene, designed to test a secret high-tech weapon called ic-crime.
it is being developed by faculty from north carolina state university.
david hinks and his team use a 3d laser to create a 360-degree view of the crime scene.
then, using the virtual replica, they'll attempt to reconstruct the crime.
a 3d scan will actually take an image of every piece of visible evidence in a room.
it means that you have a permanent record.
you can go back to the scene again and again and again.
narrator:
the scan team starts by recording millions of tiny points of the crime scene with an invisible infrared laser.
they record the victim's exact position, the severe trauma to his head, blood spatter on the walls, and what appears to be the murder weapon.
so when we get it back into the lab and we've aligned it, you'll be able to see various viewpoints coming in from different angles in the house.
narrator:
it's a forensic dream come true.
to be able to go back at any time of our choosing and be able to view it, be able to interact with the evidence, it's awe-inspiring, if you ask me.
narrator:
with the murder scene digitized, the data is now ready to go virtual.
and for that, the laser scanners partner with some unlikely colleague in crime-- video gamers.
inside north carolina state's digital game research center, director michael young and his team are using similar technologies as in games like grand theft auto.
young:
game engines provide a fantastic opportunity for serious applications of the technology like crime scene investigation.
narrator:
the crime scene is built on data triangles from the laser scan.
each triangle is one surface.
and they line up perfectly.
so you have a triangle here and then a triangle here.
and you keep doing that, until you have an entire surface.
narrator:
next the team overlays high-resolution photos of each room, enabling detectives to see views from any angle.
with the 3d replica complete, lead scanner david hinks attempts to corroborate the witness's testimony that he saw the killer leave through the window.
he positions himself to where the landlord said he was standing when he discovered the body.
now we're in the scene.
i'm standing virtually at the back door to the house.
the eyewitness said that he didn't actually enter the house, but he could see through an interior window through to the next room.
i heard somebody scuffling.
you know, running, like.
so when i looked across that's when i saw a guy, looked like he was going out the window out here.
narrator:
hinks discovers that from where the landlord was standing outside, he can't see into the scene of the crime.
you can't see through this door and onto the exterior window, as the eyewitness indicated.
let's go down into the kitchen and then look to the left, through this open area.
now we can see the exterior window.
so the eyewitness must clearly have been around this location to be able to see anybody leave from this window.
narrator:
the landlord's story doesn't add up.
hinks doesn't have to rely on his own interpretation.
the scanner proves the landlord had to go into the house to see the killer.
and there is another inconsistency.
an interior door behind the body was open when police arrived.
we can see the body on the floor.
you can see the blood spatter.
you can see the hammer here.
what we can do virtually is close the door.
it's clear from the spatter pattern that the door had to be closed during the event.
narrator:
the landlord stated that no one entered the house immediately after the murder.
but someone opened the door.
the ic-crime technology allows investigators to step into the scene and catch the landlord in two lies.
that makes the landlord a prime suspect in this simulated murder.
with a perfect record of the crime scene, police can be sure it's the suspect who's put on trial and not the forensics.
so now our intent is that we're linking our virtual environment to various databases.
narrator:
project manager mitzi montoya believes the power of the ic-crime system is that it replaces intern with objective facts.
we now have a way to collect all the data and the information about a scene, keep that in a single record, in a single environment, where forensic experts, wherever they might be, distributed around the country or around the world,
can interact and interpret that information.
narrator:
in addition to a virtual crime scene, investigators will one day add the very best of new forensic technologies being developed, like 3d fingerprints, virtual autopsies and dna.
that evidence can be presented by prosecution and defense, assessed by medical examiners and forensic scientists, and judged firsthand by a jury.
these technologies will ensure the most reliable evidence is presented and interpreted in the service of justice.
technology moves us forward.
it gives us the ability to do things that we weren't able to do before.
it gives us the ability to answer questions that we didn't even think of asking before.
narrator:
in the future, these technologies may put science back in forensic science, and make sure police put away the right criminal every time.
 sync, corrected by elderman 
are criminals born or made?
are some people more prone to violence than others?
what is the warrior gene and what is its relationship to aggression?
cutting-edge forensics get inside the criminal mind.
__file_terminal__
there is a crisis in forensic science.
the most trusted crime fighting tools responsible for hundreds of thousands of convictions, may not be as bulletproof as once thought.
there's a laundry list of forensic techniques that are now scrutinized.
fingerprints may not be as unique as we thought.
nobody's ever questioned fingerprints before.
and decades-old techniques like blood spatter analysis and bite mark comparisons are being exposed as more art than science.
killers are walking free, and innocent people are going to prison.
i don't belong here.
i'm innocent.
can new technologies help put the science back in forensic science?
now, researchers and crime scene investigators venture into the not-so-distant future where avatar detectives enter murder scenes to witness the moment of death.
we can see the body on the floor.
forensic engineers make identifications from fingerints of glass.
and coroners conduct virtual autopsies, peeling back layers of 3d victims, exposing once undetectable evidence of murder.
now, nova puts forensics under the microscope to see how good science can go bad and how to make getting away with murder a thing of the past.
right now on nova-- "forensics on trial.
♪ nova 40x02 ♪ forensics on trial original air date on october 17, 2012
 sync, corrected by elderman 
major funding for nova is provided by the following...
march 11, 2004.
7:30 a.m.
rush hour.
ten bombs rip through madrid's crowded commuter trains.
191 people are killed, more than 1,800 wounded.
it is the worst terror attack in spain's history and bears the hallmarks of al qaeda.
the scale of these attacks has horrified spain.
soft targets chosen, no warnings given.
the international manhunt that follows triggers a crisis in forensic science that will shake it to its very foundation.
...knew about the shoddy work of the fbi special agent.
forensic techniques trusted by police for over 100 years are shown to be dangerously flawed.
...served 18 years in prison for a murder he did not commit.
killers are walking free while innocent people are sent to prison, and even death row.
this was a gross perversion of justice.
the investigation to find the madrid bomber sends shockwaves through the forensic community.
and it all starts here.
in a commuter parking lot ten stations away from where the bomb went off, spanish police find a van.
inside is a blue plastic bag containing bomb-making materials.
it could be a huge break.
it's possible fingerprints have been left behind on the bag itself.
the idea that every person's fingerprint is unique has been a foundation of forensic investigation for over 100 years.
but this case poses a potential challenge.
the lines and ridges that form the distinctive patterns of fingerprints left on evidence are created from sweat and oil.
a print left on plastic, like the bag recovered in madrid, can be easily wiped off or distorted.
mark acree is a former fbi fingerprint analyst.
plastic bags by their very nature are nonporous.
the fingerprint is sitting on the surface, and it's very vulnerable to being smeared or smudged.
but there are established ways to recover prints from nonporous surfaces.
evidence ranging from gun handles to keys to plastic bags are placed in an airtight chamber.
inside, a chemical called cyanoacrylate, more commonly known as superglue, is heated up.
its vapors coat the sweat and oil of the print with a sticky white residue, making the print visible.
but it does have limitations.
superglue chemically alters the lines of sweat and oil and can even obscure details of a print's unique pattern.
using this method,
spanish investigators recover a partial print on the bag.
they rush digital photos to forensic labs across the globe, including the fbi.
examiners first need to determine if there are enough lines and details in the ridges for a clear comparison.
ridge details are broken down into distinctive shapes, like dots, that look like islands, endings, where ridgelines terminate, and intersecting lines called bifurcations.
from the madrid bomber's print, the fbi is able to zero in on seven unique traits for comparison.
now they look for a match.
they take the image, they encode it, and then it's launched against this database.
from over 47 million criminals, federal employees, military personnel and people of national security interest, the fbi's supercomputer identifies 20 prints that contain some of the same distinctive traits as the madrid print.
examiners require that 12 unique traits correspond to declare a match.
the fbi identifies one of the 20 prints that actually shares 15 traits in common with the one found in madrid.
it comes from the left index finger of this man, a 37-year-old former u.s. army lieutenant... and a convert to islam,
brandon mayfield.
as a lawyer now living in portland, oregon,
mayfield recently represented a convicted terrorist.
the fbi sneaks into his home while he's at work... taps his phones, collects samples for dna and watches his wife and children.
on may 6, 2004, just two months after the bombing, the fbi moves in.
they pushed their way into my office.
they took my hands behind my back, and they handcuffed me.
i didn't know what they were searching and arresting me for.
they never told me.
this fingerprint match sparks the arrest of american brandon mayfield as the bomber responsible for the murder of nearly 200 people-- spain's 9/11.
a fingerprint top counterterrorism officials now tell newsweek magazine is a, quote,
absolutely incontrovertible match
to portland attorney brandon mayfield.
mayfield insists on his innocence.
he hires his own fingerprint analyst to testify at a pretrial hearing.
the expert's testimony is not what mayfield expects.
he sd, "it's a match.
that's when i knew the train to a death penalty had just pulled out of the station.
federal agents take mayfield back to jail to await trial.
hours later, half a world away,
spanish investigators make a stunning discovery that changes brandon mayfield's life.
i was told that the spanish police had found that this fingerprint belonged to an algerian;
that it wasn't me.
spanish police determine that the fingerprint belongs to this man
ouhnane daoud, a known terrorist.
news from spain.
a fingerprint found on a bag linked to the madrid train attacks belongs to an algerian national, not brandon mayfield.
mayfield is released from jail after 15 days.
now the question on everyone's mind is, how could this misidentification happen?
it's a question that will eventually make its way to the united states congress.
the similarity between mayfield's print and the bomber's is undeniable.
it challenges a century-old pillar of forensic science-- that no two prints are identical.
we always assumed that fingerprints are very, very unique.
but what the mayfield case demonstrates is that parts of a fingerprint can be so similar that it's possible for two people to be identified to one latent print.
the u.s. congress calls on the national academy of sciences, the nation's most prestigious research institution, to conduct an investigation into all forensic technologies and techniques.
in july 2009, they release their report.
in short, they find there's not enough science in forensic science.
the big news was that forensic science was fractured.
jessica gabel is a professor of law and frequently lectures on the nas findings.
it lacks the rigors, the standards, the quality controls and procedures that we find usually in science.
and in that light, forensic science actually can sometimes contribute to wrongful convictions.
the madrid bomber case is a perfect storm of forensic flaws.
only a partial print is recovered on a plastic surface, and that is eventually distorted.
there is also a surprising similarity between parts of mayfield's print and the real bomber's.
together these could have led to the conviction of an innocent man.
can modern science prevent this from happening again?
the answer is deceptively simple-- examiners need a way to expose more of fingerprints' unique details.
i was talking to dr. shaler...
akhlesh lakhtakia and his team at penn state university's materials research institute are eyeing a new technology that promises to do just that.
his project got wings from a fly.
a fly's ability to elude capture fascinated lakhtakia since he was a boy.
before you can approach the fly, the fly has seen you somehow or the other, and has flown off.
lakhtakia wonders if the structure of the fly's eye gives it a unique ability to see predators approaching from all angles.
to find out, he turns to an ultrathin material called ctf
columnar thin film-- to make an impression of the minutest contours of the fly's cornea.
each square inch of the film contains billions of glass bristles.
it forms a layer 200 times thinner than a sheet of paper.
when it coats the fly's eye, the bristles conform to every peak and valley.
the result is that microscopic nooks and crannies show up in stunning three-dimensional detail.
the technology isn't helping lakhtakia catch flies.
but it does give him an idea for how to catch criminals.
could this technology be used to get the same incredible detail from a fingerprint?
this film would reproduce the topographic features, the geography, if you will, of the ridges in the fingerprint.
if ctf can capture a fingerprint, it could revolutionize forensics.
but will it work?
the team places a fingerprint on a glass slide.
the slide is loaded into a chamber called a thermal evaporator.
inside the evaporator, the fingerprint is sprayed with a microscopically thin layer of vaporized glass.
unlike superglue, the glass does not chemically alter the oils that form the print.
after about 30 minutes, the glass bristles harden into an ultrathin film that preserves minute details.
even with the naked eye, the ctf print reveals ridges that would be missing in a superglue print.
with the new technique, the ridges are far more prominent.
you can see creases.
like, this is a crease.
this is a crease.
this is another crease.
under a microscope, there are exponentially more ridgelines.
with this technique, examiners in the madrid bombing case could have had more points for comparison and a better chance to match the fingerprint to the real bomber.
the ctf fingerprint technique is currently being reviewed for use in the field.
but fingerprint analysis is not alone on the list of forensic disciplines currently under the microscope.
there's a laundry list of forensic techniques that are now scrutinized based on the nas report-- bite mark evidence, footwear impressions.
there's no real science behind it as much as it's just trying to match patterns.
and if that matching process goes bad, people's lives are changed forever.
may 23, 1991.
2:10 a.m.
in a rural community outside syracuse, new york, police and firefighters rush to a blaze at a farmhouse.
flames shooting up the front of the house.
beautiful big two-story farmhouse.
the occupant of the home, 49-year-old sabina kulakowski, is missing.
i took on deputy, and we went up this laneway, worked our way up to about here.
she was nude.
just about totally covered with blood.
she had been stabbed numerous times.
a distinctive bruise catches his eye.
we noticed a bite mark on the side of the body.
but it gets worse.
at the autopsy,
ecker sees bite marks on her breast, belly and back.
we discovered that there was at least four more sets of bite marks.
these marks could be the key to identifying sabina's killer.
dr. lowell levine is a leading expert on forensic dentistry.
the teeth cause a pattern injury in skin.
the person will actually close their teeth down on some tissue.
so a bite mark is really a bruise.
and it's basically a bruise with patterning.
bite mark forensics is based on the idea that everyone's teeth create distinctive patterns.
to find a match, forensic dentists, or odontologists, make a wax impression of a suspect's teeth.
then they try to match the pattern made by the size, shape and spacing of the teeth on the wax impression to a photo of the bruise on the skin of the victim.
what we're basically doing is looking for similar characteristics in similar locations.
in the murder of sabina kulakowski, it doesn't take long to find a suspect to compare for a match.
investigators learn that six days before the murder, a hard-drinking 31-year-old is released from prison.
his name is roy brown.
after a cayuga county, new york, social service agency takes away his daughter, he threatens a massacre.
what was said was, "what do you want?
do you want me to come down there and open up on you all with an uzi?
sabina kulakowski worked at the cayuga county social service agency.
police interviews with brown's ex-wives reveal a bombshell-- when he gets mad, he bites.
brown denies involvement in the killing.
i gave them all kinds of samples and tests to show it's not me.
i gave them all kinds of hair samples, saliva samples, blood samples, you name it.
he allows authorities to take a wax impression of his teeth.
it reveals a distinctive pattern.
brown is missing two teeth.
this leaves wide gaps in the wax impression.
the bruise on the victim should have the same gaps that correspond to brown's missing teeth.
but it only has a gap on the right side.
it appears brown's teeth don't match the evidence.
the forensic odontologist examines the bite pattern evidence.
he thinks it shows that brown bit down and, like a pit bull, twisted his mouth into the victim's skin, obscuring any gap on the left side.
based on his interpretation of the bite marks, he declares a match.
police charge brown with first-degree murder.
i said, "you're making a real serious mistake.
it ain't my teeth, man.
and they said, "well, we got confidence in our dentist.
and that was it.
a jury finds roy brown guilty.
he's sentenced to 25 years to life.
brown spends the next 15 years in jail trying to prove his innocence.
i don't belong here, you know?
i'm innocent.
i turned my cell into an office, became my own attorney.
brown pores over every scrap of evidence.
11 years into his sentence, he finds a clue.
it's a statement taken from one of the firefighters on the night of the murder.
the firefighter's name is barry bench.
he's the former brother-in-law of the victim.
they were fighting over her possession of his family's farmhouse.
transcripts reveal that police questioned bench is whereabouts the night of the murder.
brown finds something suspicious in bench's statement.
he says, "i left in my 1983 datsun century car
and went to jake's tavern.
i stayed there until 12:30 or 1:00.
bench states he then drove home.
but to brown, something doesn't add up.
he has to drive right by his family farm-- the house that's in flames.
you're going to tell me in the middle of the dark night, a gigantic ball of fire that big is just burning away, and he doesn't notice it or stop or anything?
and he's a fireman.
brown sends bench a letter on december 24, 2003.
he accuses bench of murder.
well, christmas is tomorrow.
my gift to you is, mark my words
they will eventually find out about your guilt.
have a merry christmas but don't count on a happy new year.
and i sent it out to him.
and i got a hell of a response.
five days later,
barry bench lays down in front of an amtrak train.
police become suspicious and decide to compare bench's dna to saliva recovered on the victim's t-shirt found at the crime scene.
they match with almost 100% certainty.
still, the judge believes that the bite mark evidence is strong enough to keep brown in prison.
there is only one way for brown to prove his innocence-- exhume bench's body and compare his teeth to the marks left on the victim.
the case is assigned to dr. lowell levine at the new york state forensic science unit in albany.
he faces two key questions:
did roy brown do it?
and if not, who did?
first, levine reviews the forensic evidence that convicted roy brown.
he compares the bite marks on sabina kulakowski to the wax impression of brown's teeth.
i can positively tell you
roy brown didn't cause the bite mark on the skin.
there is no way that roy brown could have caused this area in here.
while the right side of the bite mark has a space, the left side does not.
the bite mark evidence used to convict roy brown was based on an implausible interpretation.
it is impossible to get a marking if you don't have a tooth.
forensic bite mark evidence is more art than it is science.
there is a lot of varied interpretation that goes into that.
one thing is clear
roy brown did not murder sabina kulakowski.
after 15 years in prison, 47-year-old roy brown is finally released.
he sues the state of new york and wins $2.6 million.
what about barry bench?
levine examines the teeth from barry bench's disinterred jaw.
but there's a problem.
trauma from the train injury and body decomposition from being buried limits levine's ability to make a bitemark analysis.
by looking at what we were able to find on mr. bench,
i can only tell you it's possible he could have caused the bite marks on ms. kulakowski.
barry bench's badly deteriorated remains prevent levine from making a more definitive match.
the sabina kulakowski murder case is still open to this day.
so what if there were a way to perfectly preserve evidence, including bodies, and be able to access and examine them in a pristine state, no matter how much time passes?
in sweden that's already happening.
the corpse inside this body bag may be the victim of a crime.
it's what police suspect, but have no way to prove.
that's the job of dr. anders persson and his team.
they are about to perform an autopsy.
but this is no ordinary cut-open-the-cadaver job.
in sweden's center for medical image science and visualization, this man is about to be sliced up in a virtual autopsy.
it begins inside this ct scanner.
it's like an x-ray on steroids.
regular x-rays scan just the outline of bones.
but ct scans use a rotating x-ray.
it takes 12 images per second, creating cross-sectional slices of bone, thinner than a dime.
these image slices are stacked side by side, forming a stunning picture of a body's skeleton.
dr. persson's team also scans the body through an mri to search for evidence of damage to organs.
mris create a map of the body's tissue slice by slice, using powerful magnets and pulsing radio waves.
the victim is never removed from the body bag.
with the click of a mouse, the covering can be made invisible to get a virtual peek inside.
what we're seeing here is the cadaver inside of the body bag.
and right here is the zipper of the body bag, which is obviously metal.
we have made everything else... the plastic of the bag is now transparent.
the team merges the ct and mri data to produce a 3d model of the suspected murder victim.
now, the virtual autopsy begins.
i can use a virtual knife and go into the body.
we get rid of the soft tissue, and then i look for small fractures in the skeletons, and for small bleedings.
some of these fractures and other evidence are invisible to the naked eye.
the most critical are gases.
gas is a huge problem when you do a normal autopsy.
we can't see it.
gases escape the body as it's cut open in a standard autopsy.
but in the virtual corpse,
dr. persson can punch through the skin without releasing gases.
if he finds trapped gases inside, it could be a telltale sign of strangulation.
when you try to strangle someone, you squeeze your hands.
the pressure in the lungs goes up, the pressure in the trachea goes up, and the air goes out in the soft tissue.
normally, air flows directly up and down the throat, or trachea.
but when a victim is strangled, the air is cut off and the pressure forces air outside the walls of the throat.
in the virtual autopsy, gases show up as blue.
dr. persson uses his digital scalpel to get a closer look.
in the soft tissue outside the trachea, he sees something suspicious.
he calls detective conny petterson, one of sweden's federal crime scene investigators.
there shouldn't be blue color outside the trachea.
that's not normal.
and it seems that it could be a strangulation.
the virtual autopsy may have uncovered clues to a murder.
this technology is proving so effective,
dr. persson and his team at sweden's nearby interactive institute are designing a portable application.
called the virtual autopsy table, it's putting digital slice and dice at their fingertips.
when it comes to medical visualization, the user interaction design is really important.
what you want is an easy-to-use and simple system.
it's like a giant ipad.
designer thomas rydell uses simple hand gestures to peel back skin, arteries or bone.
it fulfills the very meaning of the greek word autopsia
to see for oneself.
right now we're looking at a woman who had a ruptured aneurism in the brain.
and then by rotating, we can look inside the brain.
so by just using simple gestures, you can control really advanced and huge medical data.
and the team has created a dynamic way to share investigations visually... virtual autopsies in 3d.
i can see a future when it will be a very powerful tool to show the findings in front of a jury or also during the investigation.
no matter how long ago the crime, investigators will see the dead as clearly as the day they died.
but incredible as this technology is, many of the most trusted forensic disciplines come down to interpretation.
and with interpretation comes error.
human error touches every aspect of forensic science, because every aspect of forensic science requires a human interpretation.
dr. robert shaler founded the forensics program at penn state.
he led the dna identification of the victims of 9/11 at the world trade center.
he is also one of the authors of the national academy of sciences' report.
i have to begin to question my own training, things that i've believed my entire career.
i agree with the national academy report.
we need to look at the scientific basis of these determinations.
one area he is working to improve is blood pattern analysis-- an important and frequently used tool for crime scene investigators.
shaler created this "blood cottage.
here he simulates crimes, then applies rigorous analysis to the bloody mess.
he hits me, picks up a baseball bat.
but this is difficult evidence to interpret.
he hits me a second time.
there's blood spatter on the wall.
shaler and his colleagues invent violent scenarios of bashes and slashes.
using sheep's blood, shaler and his partner in crime,
ralph ristenbatt, carefully recreate a blood pattern from a knife wound to the neck and an impact blow from a baseball bat using a stand-in for a human skull-- the severed head of a pig.
it's the best thing short of actually hitting somebody.
blood splatter seems helter-skelter to the untrained eye, but blood forms patterns in several ways-- drips from wounds, pools from blood draining from the body, spatter, the result of impact blows, and spurts from severed arteries.
examiners can use this evidence to recreate a crime step by step.
and it can even tell them the type of murder weapon used.
because knives have very thin edges they have a tendency to produce these kinds of patterns.
so what we see here is an elongated droplet with a very thin point.
and we know that it's going from left to right because it's pointing in the direction that it's moving.
so what we'd like to do now is to...
now shaler brings in future crime scene investigators to interpret the bloody mess.
that interpretation can mean the difference between a suspect's innocence or guilt.
we can see that there are bubbles in the blood, which indicates that there's saliva in with it, which makes it seem that it came from the person's mouth.
and analyzing the angle of the blood marks can help investigators pinpoint the location of each impact.
so we can infer that this came first, and then as the body fell to its final resting place, there was a second blow, and then the pool of blood.
investigators reverse-engineer from the pool of blood to reconstruct the story of the crime-- exactly where the struggle took place, how many times the victim was hit, what kind of weapon was used, and the step-by-step movements of the killer.
but even the best-trained analyst can misread that story, especially if the evidence itself is compromised.
it's an alarmingly common problem which the nas says is caused by a lack of standard forensic practices.
nowhere has this issue received more attention than in one notorious case cited in their report.
on june 13, 1994, about 12:10 a.m., in an upscale los angeles neighborhood, these bloody paw prints of a dog lead police to the site of a horrific crime scene.
detectives discover the body of a woman in a black dress.
her throat is slit so deeply, her head is nearly decapitated.
it is nicole brown simpson, the estranged wife of football legend o.j. simpson.
her friend ronald goldman lies nearby, stabbed more than 20 times.
making sense of this crime scene is a challenge.
and this investigation is compromised before it even starts.
dozens of police and reporters roam through the crime scene, smearing the blood and tracking it with their feet.
the forensic team finds several shoe prints, but there's no way to tell which prints belong to police and which belong to the killer.
renowned forensic investigator dr. henry lee is one of the expert witnesses during the trial.
he believes any blood pattern evidence found at this murder scene is rendered useless.
once you step on the bloodstain, you change the pattern now.
the contamination of the crime scene and evidence only gets worse.
just before 5:00 a.m., detectives race to o.j. simpson's home, two miles away.
simpson is not there.
a houseguest lets police in.
in o.j.'s bedroom they find crucial evidence-- this pair of dark socks.
forensic examiners at the lapd find four bloodstains on the socks.
two located near the calf area.
one is the ankle area, and the other one near the toe area.
through dna, a person's genetic fingerprint, the lab finds that three of the bloodstains belong to o.j. simpson and the fourth belongs to nicole simpson.
that's very crucial for the case.
why?
because that's a direct linkage.
puts o.j. simpson, suspect's, socks at the scene, and victim's blood somehow transferred to the socks.
dna, when properly analyzed, is the most scientifically sound forensic evidence.
matching a suspect's dna to evidence like blood found at a crime scene gives police near statistical certainty that they have the right person.
dna is based on hard science.
there is chemistry, there is biology, there is math involved with it.
the nas report singled out dna as this pillar of what the other parts of forensic science should inspire and ascribe to be.
nicole brown simpson's dna found on the socks in o.j.'s bedroom is crucial evidence used to link him to the crime.
police arrest him for the double murders of nicole brown simpson and ronald goldman.
simpson' s trial lasts more than nine months-- the longest in california history.
jurors make their decision in just four hours.
we the jury in the above entitled action find the defendant, orenthal james simpson, not guilty of the crime of murder in violation of penal code section 187a...
it is a stunning and, some say, shocking verdict.
dna on the sock irrefutably links simpson to the victim.
even dr. henry lee,
simpson's defense team's chief forensic scientist, admits that.
so how did the jury find him not guilty?
the o.j. case really revealed the problems that can happen before the evidence ever gets to the lab.
the o.j. defense team casts doubt on nearly every piece of evidence, illustrating how police contaminated the crime scene, and suggesting even worse-- actually planting evidence to frame simpson.
dr. lee points out clothing the lapd presented from simpson's bedroom.
well, let's bring two pictures up.
you see a suspender.
and the suspender actually runs over the end of the bed near the box spring.
but you have a second picture.
the suspender actually stopped next to the bed, did not go over.
so of course, this obviously tells us somebody moved the suspender.
the moving suspender is one of many contamination problems.
more critical are the bloody socks that directly link simpson and the murder victim through dna.
this lapd photo shows the socks on the floor.
but testimony from a police videographer claims earlier in the day there were no socks.
how can the socks be there at 4:35 when you just saw they're not there at 4:13?
o.j.'s defense team suggested the lapd put the blood on the socks and planted them.
who's fooling whom here?
the legitimacy of other evidence is also questioned.
this bloody envelope was moved.
a crucial fingerprint on this gate was lost.
shoeprint evidence was not collected properly.
time after time the defense put the evidence, not o.j. simpson, on trial.
i think it's absolutely a question of how the evidence was handled.
the prosecution simply couldn't prove beyond a reasonable doubt that o.j. simpson committed that crime.
it's a classic case study in what can go wrong with evidence.
beyond the question of o.j. simpson's innocence or guilt, the nas report suggests justice cannot be served if the crime scene is compromised.
but what if police had a tool that could create a digital clone of the crime scene, a perfect record to eliminate any doubt about evidence being moved or contaminated?
well, here they do.
when we come into the house, we find a victim who is laying down on the kitchen floor.
there's a large amount of blood around the head area.
from the amount of trauma that we see on the body and the amount of blood evidence that we see on the walls, we have evidence of a struggle.
detective jeff locklear starts piecing clues together.
the landlord of this abandoned house, who discovered the body, heard rumors of a squatter and came to check it out.
through the window of the back door he says he may have seen the killer.
when i heard the scuffling and saw the guy run out...
our witness says that he came in through this door, and then he saw the suspect flee through that window.
and then he looks down and he sees a body right here on the inside of the kitchen, just inside this wall.
sorting this one out will be messy.
but, thankfully, none of this is real.
it's a simulated crime scene, designed to test a secret high-tech weapon called ic-crime.
it is being developed by faculty from north carolina state university.
david hinks and his team use a 3d laser to create a 360-degree view of the crime scene.
then, using the virtual replica, they'll attempt to reconstruct the crime.
a 3d scan will actually take an image of every piece of visible evidence in a room.
it means that you have a permanent record.
you can go back to the scene again and again and again.
the scan team starts by recording millions of tiny points of the crime scene with an invisible infrared laser.
they record the victim's exact position, the severe trauma to his head, blood spatter on the walls, and what appears to be the murder weapon.
so when we get it back into the lab and we've aligned it, you'll be able to see various viewpoints coming in from different angles in the house.
it's a forensic dream come true.
to be able to go back at any time of our choosing and be able to view it, be able to interact with the evidence, it's awe-inspiring, if you ask me.
with the murder scene digitized, the data is now ready to go virtual.
and for that, the laser scanners partner with some unlikely colleague in crime-- video gamers.
inside north carolina state's digital game research center, director michael young and his team are using similar technologies as in games like grand theft auto.
game engines provide a fantastic opportunity for serious applications of the technology like crime scene investigation.
the crime scene is built on data triangles from the laser scan.
each triangle is one surface.
and they line up perfectly.
so you have a triangle here and then a triangle here.
and you keep doing that, until you have an entire surface.
next the team overlays high-resolution photos of each room, enabling detectives to see views from any angle.
with the 3d replica complete, lead scanner david hinks attempts to corroborate the witness's testimony that he saw the killer leave through the window.
he positions himself to where the landlord said he was standing when he discovered the body.
now we're in the scene.
i'm standing virtually at the back door to the house.
the eyewitness said that he didn't actually enter the house, but he could see through an interior window through to the next room.
i heard somebody scuffling.
you know, running, like.
so when i looked across that's when i saw a guy, looked like he was going out the window out here.
hinks discovers that from where the landlord was standing outside, he can't see into the scene of the crime.
you can't see through this door and onto the exterior window, as the eyewitness indicated.
let's go down into the kitchen and then look to the left, through this open area.
now we can see the exterior window.
so the eyewitness must clearly have been around this location to be able to see anybody leave from this window.
the landlord's story doesn't add up.
hinks doesn't have to rely on his own interpretation.
the scanner proves the landlord had to go into the house to see the killer.
and there is another inconsistency.
an interior door behind the body was open when police arrived.
we can see the body on the floor.
you can see the blood spatter.
you can see the hammer here.
what we can do virtually is close the door.
it's clear from the spatter pattern that the door had to be closed during the event.
the landlord stated that no one entered the house immediately after the murder.
but someone opened the door.
the ic-crime technology allows investigators to step into the scene and catch the landlord in two lies.
that makes the landlord a prime suspect in this simulated murder.
with a perfect record of the crime scene, police can be sure it's the suspect who's put on trial and not the forensics.
so now our intent is that we're linking our virtual environment to various databases.
project manager mitzi montoya believes the power of the ic-crime system is that it replaces intern with objective facts.
we now have a way to collect all the data and the information about a scene, keep that in a single record, in a single environment, where forensic experts, wherever they might be, distributed around the country or around the world,
can interact and interpret that information.
in addition to a virtual crime scene, investigators will one day add the very best of new forensic technologies being developed, like 3d fingerprints, virtual autopsies and dna.
that evidence can be presented by prosecution and defense, assessed by medical examiners and forensic scientists, and judged firsthand by a jury.
these technologies will ensure the most reliable evidence is presented and interpreted in the service of justice.
technology moves us forward.
it gives us the ability to do things that we weren't able to do before.
it gives us the ability to answer questions that we didn't even think of asking before.
in the future, these technologies may put science back in forensic science, and make sure police put away the right criminal every time.
 sync, corrected by elderman 
are criminals born or made?
are some people more prone to violence than others?
what is the warrior gene and what is its relationship to aggression?
cutting-edge forensics get inside the criminal mind.
__file_terminal__
a collection of artefacts from the muslim world is about to be put on show at the british museum.
they tell the story of the hajj, the muslim pilgrimage to mecca, strictly forbidden to non-muslims.
much of the beautiful artwork on show conforms to the religious rules which inspire the rich visual language of islamic culture, past and present.
i can only pray, inshallah, that this exhibition will be a source of education, of understanding and of delight.
in islam, depictions of god and the prophets are prohibited, but to many muslims, so too are any human depictions or living creatures.
one group would say any depiction is not allowed.
then there is the other school which say it's not a big deal.
but on show at the british museum are images from muslim history which appear to break the present-day understanding of the rules of muslim art.
in the modern period, people take this prohibition in a much more literal sense than they might have taken it in a pre-modern period.
included here are portraits, depictions of human figures and whole tableaux, showing pilgrims performing the most important pillar of the muslim faith.
there's nothing in the qur'an that says figural art is not permitted.
but idol worship is not permitted.
so, if human depiction is the source of such controversy, how come art displayed here shows a tradition of figurative art at the heart of islam, for century after century?
i'm fascinated to see how the artistic traditions of islam have navigated this through the centuries.
sometimes they've been at odds with the clerics.
sometimes, visual depiction has led to violence, crisis and destruction.
there's been no public controversy over the inclusion of these images in this exhibition, supported by the country overseeing the sacred sites of mecca.
but why?
have the rules changed?
i'm setting out to get to the bottom of what forms of art are acceptable for a muslim and why this artistic tradition has thrived in the hidden art of islam.
to understand the origins of the muslim approach to visual art, you have to understand the significance of this place.
it was here, at a cave overlooking the city of mecca, that muslims believe the prophet muhammad received his first revelation from god.
these revelations continued throughout his lifetime and formed the qur'an, the muslim holy book.
and it made mecca the centre-point of muslim worship.
it's the place people strive to reach in their lifetime...
..pray towards five times a day... ..and the direction in which they are buried when they die.
at the heart of mecca is the grand mosque, and at its centre, this, the kaaba.
in essence, the most beautiful thing about mecca is the kaaba itself and its beauty is in its simplicity.
it's a black box and it's a black box which people circumambulate.
and it's just so divinely simple, yet so divinely beautiful.
muslims believe that the kaaba was built by the prophet abraham, under divine instruction, as a focal point of a simple message that there was one god, not the many gods of the pagan past.
but by muhammad's time, the kaaba had been taken over by pagan arabs and somewhat ironically, had been festooned with icons of their tribal gods.
until, in 630 ad, after years of persecution, exile and warfare,
muhammad and his followers took over leadership of mecca.
he destroyed the idols at the kaaba and re-established it as a simple house, dedicated to the one god.
this act defined this most sacred site in islam as a place where the one god should not be depicted.
the kaaba is just something which is the house itself, the way it was built, this is the meaning in arabic.
but in fact, it's the symbol of god's house.
he's not here but this is the symbol of his presence on earth, where muslims have to go, and there is no images, nothing there to represent him because we should not represent god.
so it's a place without a physical presence but a spiritual presence.
the depiction of god himself, or the prophet, or any of the figures that are religiously associated, any prophets for that matter, or the angels, are prohibited.
this is to keep the sanctity of god who is beyond a depiction,
god who is beyond an object.
the prophet muhammad, when he takes mecca, destroys the idols in the kaaba, and the very strong iconoclastic nature of that.
the fear is that if something is made, it may become an object of worship.
people will produce, for example, sculptures, which could also double up as idols.
the simplicity of the kaaba itself provides a constant reminder to muslims of why there should be no depiction of god or the prophets.
a message most profoundly underlined when any muslim completes the pilgrimage of the hajj - the fifth pillar of islam.
i've been to hajj myself and one of the greatest journeys of any human's life is hajj.
what was the most awesome experience was looking at the house of god.
but as well as the visual meaning attached to the kaaba, there is a further reason why artists from the islamic world have been discouraged from creating depictions of any human likeness, if they are in religious settings.
in the qur'an, there are 99 different names for god, each of them signifying a characteristic.
there is al-rahman, the beneficent, al-rahim, the merciful.
one of those characteristics is al-khaliq, the creator, and it's the reason why so many muslims believe that when an artist shows the human form or the form of any creature, they're putting themselves in the role reserved for god.
and it's the reason why, over the centuries, clerics and artists have debated what is acceptable and what isn't.
it's also left room for interpretation as to what could be deemed to be realistic or not.
some would say this saying of the prophet, or sayings of the prophet, around prohibition of human beings or living entities, a drawing of them, is clear and absolute.
that is not true, because if it was absolute, why would there be so many others who say it's not?
i don't think human beings have the capacity to draw anything real.
whatever i draw can never be real, though it may be a replica of what is real, but it is not real.
therefore i sit quite comfortably, not worried about anyone competing with god and winning.
you can't win with god!
at the british museum, they're unpacking a unique parcel.
in it is a carefully wrapped qur'an, dating back to the 8th century, one of the first examples of a written qur'an.
muslim scholars accept that this qur'an is from the hijaz region of what is now saudi arabia - a region which includes the holy cities of mecca and medina.
the text is written on parchment, in an early style of arabic script called ma'il, which means "sloping", in this case to the right.
it also lacks any marks or symbols that usually distinguish letters of a similar shape.
it was this, the arabic script's shape and design that led to the first and most enduring element in islamic art.
if it was generally agreed in the early islamic community that there shouldn't be figural art in religious settings, then the early artists and calligraphers were faced with what to do with the qur'an.
after all, they were part of a tradition where the bible had been illustrated sumptuously, and so there were models for what religious books should look like.
but the qur'an, if it wasn't going to have figural designs in, what was it going to have?
and so illumination was developed and geometry, geometric designs, were something they'd inherited from late antiquity, and so, the early artists and calligraphers adopted it, used it for illumination.
and so you get frontispieces of early qur'ans which are geometric because that's a non-threatening type of decoration which adds great lustre to the items concerned.
there are three fundamental aspects behind islamic art.
you have geometry, which is the foundation.
then you have islimi, which you might know as arabesque, which is the floral aspect of islamic art.
at the top of the hierarchy is the calligraphy cos that's the word of god.
islamic artists built on the arabic saying,
purity of writing is purity of soul.
they experimented with the shape and design of the arabic letters, using the flowing arabic language to express the beauty they perceived in the words of the qur'an.
i've been doing calligraphy for about ten years now.
it started off as an exploration of, essentially, the written word.
ruh al-alam is a young british artist.
he studied the art of calligraphy in cairo, under one of the most well-known calligraphers today.
arabic calligraphy began with two fundamental sources.
one, the qur'an, the holy scripture.
and the prohibition against depicting figurative work in islam.
the prophet muhammad, peace be upon him, the first word that was revealed to him, by the angel gabriel, was "iqra", meaning "read".
this was the foundation for seeking knowledge for muslims.
but also, the verse continues, it continues to teach muslims that knowledge was taught to man by the use of the pen.
and therefore, transmission of knowledge was key.
calligraphy binds both knowledge and penmanship in one.
these are a few of the letters that are found in the holy qur'an, which, in fact, nobody knows the meaning of.
these are the mysterious letters that are found at the beginning of certain chapters of the qur'an.
er, and that mystery, of not knowing what these letters represent, is, in itself, beautiful.
calligraphers were given precise rules for how they should write letters from the medieval period.
and particularly with respect to how they copy qur'ans.
the interesting thing was how you should write a certain ligature, for example in one brushstroke, how the size of a ligature was related, say, to the proportions of the eye, the eye which is seeing it.
how the dots, the noktas, related to the ligatures and so forth.
there's elements of proportion which were very mathematical and precise, which are laid down.
the idea was you could produce something which was beautiful using these rules.
the way the letters were used, even though they may not seem as decorative, right at the beginning, in between the 8th to 10th centuries, even then there was a very specific geometry used.
there was a real harmony in the way the letters were fitted to the page and the way certain letters were elongated so that each line, the margins would be even on both sides and they'd be justified.
as islam spread, the art of calligraphy developed, reaching its peak, among other places, here, in turkey, under the ottoman empire.
calligraphy is also integral to the decoration of the world's great mosques.
the words come from the qur'an or are names of the prophet muhammad.
at an istanbul art gallery, there is the largest collection of contemporary turkish calligraphy.
it is put together as a homage to the prophet muhammad.
in this work, art and belief go hand in hand.
man describes artwork in another language
oh, there's er...
amazing, fantastic.
do you have any particular feelings when you're writing verses from the qur'an?
translation:
when you look at the art forms in the world, you will see that the only divine form is the art of calligraphy, because we are putting the words of god on paper and hence enable people to read it.
that's why i can't describe or compare the feeling i have doing calligraphy.
actually, it is said that the heart can only be happy with the mention of god.
the same feelings apply to us when we deliver qur'anic verses in calligraphy.
alongside calligraphy, the exquisite precision of traditional islamic design, seen in arabesque and geometric patterns, has maintained its appeal in contemporary design studios.
it's a language of symmetry which was first developed by the greeks, but then extrapolated and developed upon within the islamic tradition.
so often what you will see is an underlying geometric pattern which you might find in euclid.
and then, on top of that, you'll find the muslim craftsmen would elaborate more complex geometric designs which would appear on top of that grid.
and then they would hide the underlying grid.
the idea is that these patterns are there to engender a contemplative state.
the repetitions that one sees within islimi patterns and geometric patterns allow the mind to think upon the repetition of pattern within nature and the idea of the infinite weave and the infinite movement and repetition of form that one sees within the natural world.
so this is an example of islimi, or arabesque.
to complete a composition like this, you'd start off with the geometry, that's the structure.
so, you'll draw your square and then inside this square is a dynamic square, here.
and then that houses these linear shapes.
and they're the structural shapes, you have four of those, here, here and here.
and then you have, overlaid, four spirals.
and they're the structural lines.
once you have those, you can add the motifs.
this particular motif is called a rumi motif.
it's not named after the poet.
both the poet and the motif are named after the city, rum, or asiatic rome, which was in anatolia, the capital of anatolia.
there are original examples of this in seljuk carvings of birds and animals.
and as they adopted islam, they lost the representation and it became this abstract art motif.
it's often said that islamic art is like a meditation upon the invisible, so you can see, as well as structural principles here, there's a symbolic language in operation also.
the fundamental link between proportion and beauty, that's at the heart of it.
the principle of islamic aesthetics, exactly the same notion of proportion between different shapes and between the horizontal and the vertical, between the different dimensions.
everything is quite precise.
of course, sometimes they get things slightly wrong.
certainly the traditional argument is that if the proportion is slightly off, then you can, through your aesthetic sense, notice it's wrong.
but the fundamental thing was that if you got the proportions right, you would produce a work of beauty and that's quite important.
early islamic art and architecture also try to depict the qur'anic description of paradise - a concept of beauty on earth, with gardens, flowing streams, geometric arches.
there's a verse in the qur'an where god says, "we have taught you how to calculate,
we have taught you the science of computation
about the stars and the moon and the planets.
we've given you the knowledge so that you can navigate your way
through the seas by creating compass.
all of these indicate to one particular science that's called mathematics.
if you look at islamic history - the garden, the mosque, the minaret, the mihrab, the pulpit - every part of an islamic architectural depiction have always been geometrically perfect.
the way the ventilations have been designed, they're all geometrically perfect, always correlating with one another, often depicting the five pillars of islam.
or often depicting the articles of faith, depicting the heavenly presence, the gardens of paradise, the water, the fruit, the palm tree.
all of these are geometrically put in and inspired by the very notion of maths from the qur'an itself.
the artistry and the aesthetics of the islamic world, born out of the constraints about depicting humans and other living creatures in religious settings, have become part of global tastes in art and design beyond the muslim context in which they were created.
many outside of the islamic world have not recognised what inspired these increasingly familiar motifs.
ah, this is an amazing thing.
as part of the kiswa archive, this gives you the photos - they're literally like little passport photos of the people who were actually making the sacred textiles.
to be a muslim artist has traditionally meant that whether you were a painter or an architect, or working with textiles, your palette was made up of calligraphy, arabesque and geometry.
it's completely wonderful to be able to put a face to these people whose job it was to make the sacred textiles.
these particular craftsmen deployed the traditional islamic artistic approach to the creation of textiles for use around the kaaba.
the mahmal was an ornate cloth, brought annually for many years from egypt to adorn the kaaba at the time of the hajj.
it'd be placed next to the black cloth that covered the kaaba throughout the year called the kiswa.
what we've got here are objects from a very important archive of all sorts of documents that are to do with the making of the kiswa in cairo.
the kiswa being the covering for the kaaba.
we talk about the kiswa, which is the black covering, but it's also all the other textiles that went with it.
there was a special workshop in cairo where all of these wonderful textiles were made.
and what's wonderful about this piece here, is that this is the template for the design of the bag, so the bag that was made to carry the precious keys of the kaaba that were given as gifts.
in order to get the correct design, they made little holes through it, in order then that you could be able to work out the design on the textile.
the mahmal has had its share of politics.
the mamluk and ottoman rulers of egypt started a tradition of sending this heavily decorated textile to mecca, accompanying the pilgrim caravans to the hajj.
it would stay on the kaaba and then come back to cairo.
to the egyptian and turkish rulers, it was a symbol of their protective rights over the kaaba.
but to the saudis, it was a symbol of territorial control and religiously heretical.
in 1814, followers of a saudi cleric, ibn wahhab, tried to stop it.
and in 1926, the practice finally came to an end.
many of the traditions which are around the hajj were stopped, partly because it was an assertion of their power, but also because they didn't necessarily want people to associate sanctity with objects.
so, for example, if you have this annual commemoration where special cloth is made or weaved for the kaaba and its use of gold thread, very nice velvet and silks and so forth, then their understanding was that this was about veneration
of a cubic building.
whereas, of course, everyone else understood that traditionally this was about the beauty of the place.
it was about the celebration of the kaaba because it was a central focus of hajj.
it wasn't about the worship or veneration of a building, it was about beautifying it, because it was the centre of the rituals.
through history, the rulers of the islamic world held secular power, as well as religious faith.
some faced a dilemma when these twin forces pulled in opposite directions.
little more than 50 years after the death of the prophet muhammad, such dilemmas were being faced by one of the earliest muslim heads of state, whose rule began in 682 ad.
if you're an emperor, or a king, or a queen, what image do you put on your coins?
byzantine and roman emperors put their portrait on it.
caliph abdul malik, one of the first muslim rulers of the umayyad empire, wasn't so sure.
in the late 7th century, he was faced with the problem of introducing a new coinage for the islamic community.
and he had to choose.
he had the byzantine coinage or the sasanian iranian coinage.
both had figures of kings or emperors on them.
he tried putting a figure of himself on a coinage but then he rejected that, having issued it, and he developed a completely new coinage which was solely epigraphic.
that means it was covered in inscriptions on both sides, qur'anic inscriptions and later historical inscriptions.
figural imagery was discarded at that point for the coinage.
that's a very significant moment in islamic history because that means from then onwards, the identity of the islamic community, the islamic empire, was focused on coins which had no images on them, simply the calligraphic inscriptions.
but other muslim rulers, as they grew in power and wealth, wanted art to reflect their lives, in their palaces and private spaces.
they asked their artists to draw pictures of them, of their lives, holding court, hunting, or just looking good.
paintings of this kind illustrate the luxurious lives of muslim monarchs.
these rulers were not bothered by what islam allows or doesn't allow.
what stimulated them was voyeurism, power, greed, an absolute chauvinistic lifestyle that they led, almost veering into, or edging on to hedonism that we see in the modern world.
in fact, maybe mutation of hedonism in a much graver manner.
artists in the islamic world faced a serious dilemma.
on the one hand, they were being asked to produce work that showed the human form.
but to do so would invoke the wrath of the clerics.
what they did to try and overcome this was to strike a balance between these two very conflicting demands.
some artists, as a means to compromising between the clerics and the rulers, did depict the monarchs, the emperors, in one-dimensional pictures.
so you actually can't make a real feature of a human being or a person, they all would look very similar cos it's one-dimensional.
that was a compromise.
they did not want to become known, in the eyes of the clerics, as aiding the heretic, and they did not want to be killed by the emperor for rebelling and being called treacherous or traitors.
and they came up with these one-dimensional pictures.
there were times when you had literal-minded clerics, who were very unhappy about figurative art, in the same way as they were unhappy about the king drinking wine, right?
but we also know for most of history, they tolerated it perfectly well.
things ebb and flow.
sometimes what happens in the modern period is we assume there is a basic relationship between the clerics and those in political power and that this relationship has been fixed throughout time.
and this is clearly not the case.
for most of history, those in power basically were in charge.
so what they said, the values they established, the aesthetics they established, the court culture they established, was far more significant than any rules that any clerics put down.
we never find, in later islamic art, the three-dimensional plastic art.
you know, sculpture, images of the ruler in three dimensions.
and also, there's a tendency in the figurative art, in miniature painting, for example, not to represent volume.
i think that's something to do with an avoidance of giving life to pictures so as you're rivalling god.
muslim artists use form and colour in a particular way.
the composition does not have any perspective.
there is no light or shade.
the paintings are never naturalistic.
they do not temper the edges of their coloured areas with reflections or shadows.
there are no atmospheric colour effects used to convey depth or sense of distance.
brightly coloured animals and plants, which are supposed to be lying in the far distance, are depicted as large and as clearly as those on the foreground.
my surmise would be because it all began with wall paintings.
and wall paintings tend to have areas of flat colour because that's the way they've traditionally been painted.
the earliest wall paintings we have from the near east or middle east, are from the sogdia, that's the 6th, 7th century ad in central asia.
and they show the stories of rustam in polychrome, but in different flat colours.
i think probably what's happened is those have got translated into miniature painting and books originally.
so that idea of flat colours side by side is the way it developed.
i think it's a popular misconception that islamic art is either geometric, or floral or calligraphic.
the great courts produced artworks that are surprisingly varied and include a plethora of figural imagery.
but whilst the great courts may have produced a plethora of figurative images, over many centuries that did not always mean that the controversial nature of such artwork diminished.
in fact, one artefact in the british museum exhibition provides evidence of what happened in the 14th century, when the tastes of secular power collided with a more orthodox outlook.
the court of a mongol ruler dispatched this candlestick as a present to the city of medina, in modern-day saudi arabia, the city where the prophet himself is buried.
when it was originally produced, it had figures that went all around it.
if you look closely at it, you'll see the faces have been rubbed off.
they would have been inlaid and would have popped out when you first looked at them, they'd have been a prominent band across the candlestick base.
and now they've been muted.
but these controversies and sensibilities over what can be depicted have not been observed in the same way by one important branch of islam.
the great schism in islam between the majority sunni and the minority shi'a is also reflected in the development of islamic art.
while art in most of the sunni muslim world had this tension between the ruler's desire for figurative paintings and the cleric's dislike of it, art for shi'a muslims developed in complete contrast.
shi'a theology includes the veneration of members of the prophet's family, down in the case of twelver shi'ism, which is the dominant religion in southern iraq and iran, it has the veneration of those imams,
members of the prophet's family, in a way which doesn't happen in sunni islam, in orthodox islam.
shi'a islam traces its beginning to the battle of karbala, in modern-day iraq, where in 680 ad, the prophet's grandson hussein was killed, a conflict over the leadership of the expanding muslim community.
the origin that shi'ites claim is the battle of karbala, at the end of the 7th century, when hussein, the grandson of the prophet, is killed by the caliph's forces, and that becomes the excuse,
the reason, the moment at which shi'ism looks back perpetually.
it won't forget, it won't forgive and that becomes the driving force for shi'ism in the future.
now then, that narrative is about people.
and so you have, in shi'ism, a motivation for showing what those people were like.
just as in christianity, you had a narrative about jesus as a man, as well as in the christian belief as the son of god, so in shi'ite islam you have a narrative of the death of hussein at karbala and of the other members of the family.
and that, i think, is what's behind the use of imagery in shi'ite islam.
just a few weeks ago, i was in iraq and i picked up a poster depicting the battle at karbala, with quite a lot of blood, you know, heads that have been chopped off, arrows in the eye and so forth.
and it's supposed to be a scene which evokes sorrow and pathos.
the function of a lot of the art which is associated with karbala is reminding people what happened and it's a vehicle to encourage them to cry and grieve over what happened.
such depictions are at odds with the sunni tradition, which is followed by most muslims.
and yet, some of the items on display here show that even within this tradition, the orthodoxy surrounding human depiction in religious settings is not always followed.
especially when the epic hajj journey of a muslim ruler becomes a historical event in its own right.
mansa musa, the ruler of mali in west africa, made his pilgrimage in 1324, his procession reported to include 60,000 men and 12,000 slaves.
mali was the source of west african gold, immensely wealthy.
he carried with him something like 80 camels loaded with gold dust.
when he reached cairo, he started buying trinkets.
and the cairoean historians record that the whole economy went completely berserk.
inflation went up sky-high and it took about ten years for the economy in egypt to recover.
the depiction of his hajj journey is among the earliest artistic example, not just of the inanimate features of mecca, but of the human figures arriving into this undeniably religious setting.
century after century, the pilgrimage is depicted and the pilgrims.
there's a very clear line between the religious context and the secular context.
and so, in secular context, in people's homes or in palaces, it was quite often the case that you could have figural representation on the walls of houses and so on.
it's a very different story when you get to the religious context because qur'ans are never illustrated in the same way that bibles are, that in mosques, you never get figural representation.
and so that's actually a very clear distinction.
hajj is obligatory only to those muslim men and women who have the financial means to do it.
before setting out, they have to settle all their debts.
the dates for hajj is set through the muslim lunar calendar.
before getting to mecca, pilgrims meet at specified places to get into a state of ihram, or purification.
men need to wear two white seamless cloths.
women can wear normal clothes but most wear white and they need to keep their faces uncovered.
they then make their way to the grand mosque and the kaaba that stands inside it.
they circumambulate around it seven times before going on to carry out other rituals that take place over the next five to six days.
now, imagine i had to tell this story of the pilgrimage without actually seeing any pilgrims.
it's a situation that must have faced the most religious of muslim leaders and yet time and again, the need to tell the powerful story of the hajj overcame any reticence about showing the human form.
these are my absolute favourite objects within the exhibition.
they're paintings that accompanied a pilgrim guide, called the anis-al-hujjaj, and they show pilgrims coming from india and you see the little pilgrim boats here.
they would have set off on these ocean-going dhows.
you can imagine in those days, it was really terrifying going on these journeys across the sea.
here we see the pilgrims who are described as crossing the sea of oman, so this is what we know as the arabian sea.
so here you can see larger ships and then smaller ones because once they got close to the coast, often they needed to be guided by these special sea captains.
here, before they reached jeddah, they would stop at mocha, in yemen.
and again, this lovely schematised image of mocha in yemen.
there is one place in the muslim world where paintings of pilgrims have flourished, without the patronage of wealthy rulers.
many of the houses here are decorated with paintings depicting the hajj journey.
it's a centuries-old tradition and it shows the ways pilgrims travelled there, the people who did the hajj and the familiar sights of mecca.
the ordinary egyptians who are commissioning these paintings certainly have very little in common with the wealthy rulers who were commissioning their works of art on the hajj centuries ago.
their status are different, as is the modes of transport which took them to mecca.
but what's important to bear in mind is that this tradition that i'm witnessing here is a continuation of the figurative depiction of the pilgrimage to the hajj that was started centuries ago.
400 miles south of cairo, this area is now part of the expanding city of luxor.
my guide here is khaled hafez, a well-known egyptian artist and a muslim who has worked with local painters here and knows their work and style well.
these types of hajj paintings are only to be found in this part of egypt.
this is a beautiful example of how hajj paintings are.
what i find here phenomenal is that it actually documents, just like ancient egyptian painting, what happens.
so it states, the pilgrim did visit the holy house of god and he visited the grave of the prophet with his wife, this year, 2007.
what i find amazing is that it's the first thing you see.
the journey of the hajj is on the face of the house, which is extraordinary.
there is some sort of a recipe to every hajj painting that you find, you know, in different arrangements.
so you have the element of the kaaba.
and then here we have an image of a mosque.
of course, it signifies here the prophet's mosque in medina, or the mosque of al-kaaba in mecca.
the calligraphy is done by a professional calligrapher, and he uses a type of calligraphy called thuluth, which is the king of all calligraphy types.
what is the calligraphy saying?
is it a verse from the qur'an?
it says that a good pilgrimage only is the way to heaven.
right.
and then himself, the hajj, we know that this hajj has appeared.
the artist did his best to sort of like portray.
and he's dressed in the white cloth that you wear when you go to the hajj.
absolutely.
given the sensitivities in islam about the showing of the face in art, do people object in these paintings to the display of the face?
no, not here.
to the locals in luxor and the practitioners of hajj paintings on the walls, there is no objection to that at all.
so this idea of prohibition of figuration does not exist in hajj paintings.
why do you think people to this day still want to make such a statement like this?
i think that with the introduction of islam to egypt, what went very well is this idea of reading and writing and documenting everything involved.
egyptians never lost this trait since the ancient times.
actually, we never lost the figuration in our art, and i think here, there is this always controversy between, you know, figuration, non-figuration...
in islam, yeah.
but islam never abolished the cultural specificity of some parts.
what came before.
egypt, for instance, it was a visual culture and a verbal culture.
the communities that were islam-originated were principally the desert communities, more verbal cultures.
it's also, you know, like bragging that we did visit the prophet.
this positive type of bragging existed since the ancient times.
mustapha, tell me, why did you want your house to be painted like this?
because you want everyone to see you've been to hajj?
yes.
the paintings that you find on the houses in this part of southern egypt don't have the elaborate style with which one associates islamic art around the world today - in fact, you could describe these paintings as being quite crude.
but that is to miss the point, because what these paintings show is that even in the poorest parts of the islamic world people are willing to use figurative art to tell the story of how powerful this spiritual journey the hajj is,
but that they're also willing to use art to tell the whole world this story, as it has been done for centuries.
it seems to me that there's always been artists working in the islamic world throughout history who've produced figurative art.
but many have tried to avoid the realistic depiction of humans because it might be seen as putting them in direct competition with god - the creator.
the closest they've come to such figurative art in religion is when they've portrayed the epic journey of pilgrims to the hajj in mecca.
but, one rule has remained constant - such figurative art has never appeared in mosques or in the qur'an.
as interest in islam increases worldwide, so does understanding of its artistic traditions.
in recent years, auction rooms and galleries around the world have moved away from calling it "islamic art", and is more careful around terms such as "muslim artists".
instead, this work is increasingly known by sotheby's and others as "art of the islamic world".
at the same time, auction houses have seen in a boom in interest in art in the islamic tradition.
we've seen an explosion of interest in the auction world.
it's partly pride on the part of muslims, pride in their own heritage, and a desire to own important artworks produced by muslim craftsmen and muslim patrons over a period of 1,400 years.
the interest also comes from other quarters, from non-muslims - we have private collectors all across europe and north america, and the far east indeed, and then there are institutional projects - new museums who are looking to build
collections of national and international importance.
the buoyant market means galleries like this one in london are thriving - showing the work of a new generation of artists in the islamic tradition.
it's intriguing to see how they interpret figurative depiction, and to see the kind of imagery they are choosing.
this is one of my personal favourites because what's quite magical about the piece is you have the alif and the laam and the meem but it also looks like a musical note.
reedah el saie runs an art gallery in central london.
it showcases works of many contemporary british muslim artists.
i think, post 9/11, there was a political shift towards understanding islam - whether that was a negative or positive context, there was an interest there.
that has had an impact on wider international and national muslim identity, communities, and has impacted also art being produced by artists that are living in the western world and their interpretation of sort of geopolitical sort of trends.
so there's been a surge in the amount and quality of art being produced around that whole dialogue.
glimpses of the human figure can be found, but they don't dominate this gallery.
they appear to respect the inheritance of an audience of muslims, who prefer its art to steer away from depicting people with any kind of realism.
one artist whose work consists of modern interpretations of calligraphy is reluctant to show her own face.
i don't want it to be about me, i want my art to speak for itself.
i don't want to be forefront of my art because i believe that my art should be good enough to speak for itself without me speaking.
this artwork is all about breaking down barriers and overcoming your fears and not allowing your fears to stand in the way of what it is you may want to achieve.
how i have made a hole in the canvas, it connotes the idea of breaking through and not allowing that barrier to stand in the way.
the kaaba in this painting represents an unseen reality, just as the kaaba in reality does.
for me, it represents going back into my own heart.
there's a sufi master from morocco and he wrote, "surely we are all meanings set up in images.
that is something that has always affected all of my work.
at the exhibition at the british museum, this instinctive respect for the non-figurative tradition is also evident in the choice of composition, materials and imagery being used by the contemporary artists, showing their work inspired by the hajj.
idris khan's painting of the kaaba invokes the transformation the journey to mecca is supposed to bring about.
the shape itself is based on the mosque in mecca.
i like this explosion of words out of a central form.
the idea is to try and capture an emotional response to what it was like to leave the journey of hajj, essentially.
the actual structure of the piece is made up of different sentences and i guess, in a way, in the back of my mind,
i was trying to find out what people leave mecca with and what they're asking themselves.
after having prayed in a certain direction for so many years of your life to this incredible, emotional black cube, what is it like when you're there, and then you leave?
does it change you?
especially when they're walking around an exhibition like this.
they're looking at these incredible works about the journey of hajj.
as they come to the last piece maybe they're asking themselves those very questions.
do i want to go to hajj?
what have i learnt while i've been at this exhibition?
somehow to try and capture that emotion in this drawing.
there is something very nice in the repetition of picking a stamp up and stamping a wall directly with the sentences.
each time you're stamping, you're almost trying to trace the steps of perhaps someone walking towards the kaaba.
starting in the centre and moving out.
that creates incredible energy to the centre which is what the kaaba is.
this flow of emotion, this flow of people around it and towards it all the time.
ahmed mater, a saudi artist, has conceptualised this in his installation which he is setting up at the exhibition.
a concept which is brilliantly simple and profound.
it is simple art that reflects the profound nature of the kaaba.
this simple building that continues to be an inspiration to countless artists, and attracts more muslims than ever.
muslims are no longer so dependent as they once were on depictions in figurative paintings to capture this enduring experience.
it's what i find incredibly moving that that same spirit of wanting to go there, and to touch that sacred place, and the renewal and all of that,
i find incredibly moving.
it just literally doesn't seem to have changed at all.
you may have been coming by camel at one point and by aeroplane now, but it hasn't changed.
the essence doesn't appear to have changed at all.
that's just looking at it from my perspective.
over the centuries the artistic traditions of islam have embraced a wider range of art forms than has been generally recognised.
and throughout muslim history, this has included figurative art not usually associated with muslims.
it's revealing to see which of these visual styles emerge most commonly in the work of today's contemporary artists.
the most common, recurring image is of the very place that first defined the muslim approach to visual art.
in some way the kaaba itself is like a modernist sculpture in its form.
this solid black box.
i made steel cubes.
the dimension of each cube is the dimension of the kaaba.
but chopped into 49 cubes.
seven times by seven times, exactly.
of course, as one walks around the kaaba, they have to walk around seven times.
it's made from steel, made from blue steel, then it's lacquered to give it a really shiny, jewel-like quality which i wanted.
then i sandblasted the daily prayer into each cube five times because obviously you're supposed to pray five times a day.
each cube is unique.
they're done with five different segments of the prayer.
you have to look at it in three different ways.
you have to look at aesthetically.
you have to look at it where it changes the way you think about a certain environment.
and also whether it actually transports you back to a certain place.
for me, it's about transporting me back to a certain time in my life.
therefore, when you're entering an incredible space like this and you see 49 steel cubes that are shaped in the same way as the kaaba which the show is based on essentially, you're asking them to think about making links between now and then.
restrictions on acceptable forms of art, seen by many as limiting the output of artists in the islamic tradition, appear here to be doing no such thing.
the artists we've encountered are not constrained in expressing their artistic intentions within a framework that sets out clear boundaries.
the rules they understand around figurative representation are informing, not constraining them.
today, artists in the islamic tradition are creating art which has as much power as that of any artist.
but now in mecca, the surroundings of the kaaba are changing.
the grand mosque and its environment are part of a huge redevelopment of the city, as visitors reach record numbers and are set to rise even more in the years to come.
but will artists of the future still continue to find inspiration here when the kaaba itself appears to be on the verge of being dwarfed by its surroundings?
will these changes put at risk that simple beauty of this most important building, the kaaba?
carrying as it does so much influence over the beliefs, the practice and the art of islam?
subtitles by red bee media ltd
__file_terminal__
now on top gear
there are 256 million cars on american roads, but which one is the worst?
we're about to find out.
wood: [ laughing ] oh, he almost flips it. what you drive says a lot about you.
some cars are undeniably cool, while others less so.
but which is the least cool car in the country?
to find out, we each spent $1,500 and bought the worst car we could find for each other.
then we'd compete over which one of us could make the most out of the crap car we'd been given.
this is easily the worst car ever made.
it is disgusting.
it is cheap.
this is the ugliest vehicle ever made.
and what makes it sweeter is i know the person i bought this for hates this vehicle.
hates it.
adam's gonna love this car.
no.
he is going to absolutely hate this car.
but it's perfect for him.
it is so uncool.
it's one of those cars that just doesn't even realize how uncool it really is.
[ tires screech ]
if you're over 60, you've already guessed the car that i've chosen for adam.
it's a 1977 mustang ii.
and it is the most uncool car ever made.
it's a mustang.
it's supposed to be a muscle car.
and this is everything that a muscle car shouldn't be.
it's slow, it's ugly, it's 4-cylinders, 4-speed, takes over 14 seconds to get to 60 miles an hour.
what were they thinking?
adam's gonna hate it.
[ horn honks ]
[ laughs ]
nice.
2001 pontiac aztek.
the uncoolest car ever.
wow.
this personifies everything that was wrong with g.m. in the late '90s.
designed by committee.
you know the committee that designed this wasn't fired.
they were executed.
it's terrible.
the interior...
the knobs are this big so you can turn them with gloves, but they look like cartoon knobs.
and it comes with a tent.
a tent!
a tent?
yes.
'cause you're embarrassed to park this in your driveway, so you have to live in the tent.
okay, it's pretty widely known the aztek is uncool.
yes.
but it is not as uncool as a mustang ii, your new ride.
you're an evil man.
i thought you'd like this.
it's a muscle car.
it's an atrophied muscle car.
what have i ever done to you?
you picked me on an aztek.
i didn't pick that for you.
that's for rutledge.
that means rutledge picked my car.
[ laughs ] i don't even want to look at it.
don't turn around.
i don't want to look at it.
don't turn around.
[ horn honks ]
[ laughs ] it does have a horn.
that says something.
it is justice.
yes.
no!
[ laughs ]
feast your eyes on a 1988 yugo gv.
this is the lowest of the low of the models.
is it a real yugo?
oh, yeah.
i left the state to punish you with this.
look at those 13s.
i've got bicycle tires that are bigger than these.
look at the style on that thing.
i mean, if the reputation of this car isn't uncool enough, you in it just [whistles]
the bad news for me is that i see two awful cars over there, and all i can think is, "please, god, don't make me drive an aztek.
okay, look.
i could have got you a neon.
that would have been actually better than...
aw, really?
i couldn't find one.
i looked.
i couldn't find one.
no, the aztek is way less cool.
aw, god.
okay.
undeniably we've amassed in one place three of the most uncool cars ever built.
so, what are we doing with them?
please tell us.
all right.
let's see here.
so, your first challenge will be a hot lap at willow springs raceway 60 miles from here.
fastest lap wins.
wait.
we have to drive 60 miles?
in these cars.
and then...
be seen...
yeah.
...
publicly on the way.
yeah.
a yugo on the racetrack.
yeah.
could be a first.
[ laughs ]
let's hit the road.
this is so shameful.
an 89-horsepower, turd-brown, creepy-gym-teacher mustang ii.
[beep] you, tanner foust.
how do you make a yugo go 60 miles an hour?
push it off a cliff.
wood:
honestly, i am ashamed to drive this thing.
i just hate it so much.
pontiac made the aztek from 2001 to 2005, and they needed to sell 150,000 of them to break even.
and they failed.
in 2007, there were still some new '05s on the lot.
this car may not be that cool, but it's way cooler than the yugo.
and that car is super dangerous.
it has no power.
there's no way you could ever look cool in a yugo.
it's just an impossibility.
not only would we have to drive these cars, but we were also going to an auction to find out how much each was worth.
so, somehow we had to make these crappy cars we were driving cool.
that was gonna be a struggle with my yugo, but i'm a glass-half-full kind of guy.
so i was gonna concentrate on the positives.
okay, sure, the yugo's been written up in basically any automotive publication as being one of the top worst cars ever built.
that's undeniable.
there are only about 10,000 of these things roaming the streets of the u.s.
it's almost like a collector's item.
the fact that rutledge had to go across the country to buy this car either means that they just aren't running anymore or nobody wants to sell theirs.
i'm thinking that it's the latter.
but could adam come up with anything positive for his turd-brown mustang ii?
at least this is a mustang.
it's not a cool mustang, but a mustang.
it's like khloé kardashian.
enh, she ain't the best kardashian, but at least she's a kardashian.
rut, who did you buy that yugo from?
a very peculiar man in las vegas.
did he have an accent, wear black socks with sandals?
i think the socks and sandals might be more of an aztek owner.
i think the aztek owner is gonna be wearing, like, sandals with white socks under them pulled up to just below the knees, short shorts with 12 pockets, and a tank top.
well, who would own a mustang ii, then?
he's retired from the insurance industry.
he lives with his mom, and she lives with her mom.
he keeps a locked door in the basement that no one's gonna see until he dies.
and then the mom is gonna deny knowing anything ever went on down there.
[ laughs ]
we arrived at our first challenge...
ferrara:
you've got to be kidding me.
...to find that we wouldn't just be racing each other.
the track was hosting an exotic car day.
there were $300,000 lamborghinis, quarter-million-dollar ferraris, tuned-up bmws, lotuses, high-end mercedes, and us.
this will be one of the most dangerous things, probably, that any of us have done, okay.
because there will be cars with 100-mile-an-hour closing speeds on the straightaway.
i'll probably be on fire and not be able to tell.
i already could tell oil's leaking onto the back-left tire.
gasoline's leaking onto the back-right tire, which, by the way, is where the exhaust is.
there's a lot that can go wrong.
i don't think either of you have the fear that i do, which is rolling this piece of [bleep] over.
you'll be fine.
[ laughs ]
i mean, you wouldn't...
[ laughing ] that was genuine hate.
yeah.
i mean, look at it.
the only way you could make this thing more attractive would be to roll it.
i'm gonna get on the track.
ferrara:
either way, we had a challenge to complete.
we had to brave danger and shame to set the fastest time we could.
we'd also be trying not to ruin the day for the owners of the cool cars, who paid thousands of dollars to be there.
i'll just gonna be lucky if i don't die in this.
i think i've done a 1:21 around this track.
i don't think the yugo's gonna go quite that quick.
this is gonna be embarrassing.
there it is.
let's go.
okay, aztek.
you can do this.
we're timing the car here.
all right, downshifting.
after that, we have to downshift up the hill.
wood:
driving an aztek on the track was like trying to jello-wrestle with a bear.
it just has so much body roll, and it's got on-road/off-road tires.
and over in the turd-mobile,
adam was having sand kicked in his face.
yeah, yeah.
show-off.
holy cow, you went with the green, huh?
lovely.
i got about 30 cars behind me.
oh, i hope that's a different lotus.
otherwise i've been lapped.
i've been lapped.
oh, there's a ferrari on my ass!
[ tires screech ]
okay.
and i'm off the course.
whoopsie.
black flag.
foust:
rutledge got black-flagged, which meant he was disqualified.
so it was down to adam and me.
i wasn't about to let the yugo get out-cooled by a faux mustang.
go on!
get out of here!
there they go.
kind of like a brake check in front of a yugo, though.
whoa!
that guy almost just crashed into me!
all i had to do was complete this lap to win, but i hadn't counted on the yugo's legendary design quality, which didn't extend to the gas cap.
this is awful.
i am spewing gas all over the place.
kiss my aztek!
ferrara:
we each try to prove that our crap cars are cool, and tanner finds out just how fast a $300,000 supercar can go.
oh, my god.
this is scary!
foust:
america has over 2.7 million miles of paved roads, and there are a lot of cars out there using them.
but which is the worst?
we'd each bought the least cool car we could find and given them to each other.
our first challenge was seeing whose car was slowest.
oh, there's a ferrari on my ass!
[ tires screech ]
rut hadn't even completed a lap before being disqualified.
halfway through the last lap, my yugo started showing a small design flaw.
this is awful.
i am spewing gas all over the place.
so they black-flagged me, giving adam the win by default.
[ ferrara laughs ]
nan:
whoo-hoo!
man #2:
yeah!
mustang!
[ horn honks ]
[ applause ]
you and i, we should be ashamed of ourselves letting what is undoubtedly the worst pretend muscle car ever built win anything.
hey, you bought it for me.
and at least my car wasn't spewing gas all over the track.
yeah, that's true.
it's still not as bad as the yugo.
okay, first of all, the yugo is very rare and very exotic.
so is typhoid.
[ laughter ] whatever.
i got a chance to drive another very rare and exotic car over in britain recently.
i assume it was faster than the yugo.
yes, it is.
in fact, the american manufacturer hasn't found the top speed yet, so i went over to england to see if i could help them out.
this is england, a place where you can still legally marry sheep and home to the world's oldest reigning queen,
sir elton john.
not too far from the bustling streets of london...
[ engine revs ] ...there's a car maker that claims to have crafted a vehicle capable of giving you one of the purest driving experiences imaginable.
and by pure, i mean it doesn't have the technology to help you be a better driver.
it can do zero to 60 in 3.7 seconds.
it weighs the same as a mini cooper but has 520 more horsepower.
but what it doesn't have is a confirmed top speed.
[ tires screech ] that was reason enough for me to hop on a plane.
this is the noble m600.
if you like super cars and you've got the means, well, you can run down to the ferrari dealership and get yourself a 458 or maybe get the latest lamborghini, the aventador.
but if your taste runs on the extra exotic...
what if you want something that will leave those somewhat common italian super cars in the dust, something that only 15 people will be able to buy this year and that claims to be the best driver car ever built?
well, then you're gonna need one of these.
if you've never heard of noble, you're not alone.
it's a small company in a little town outside london, and only a dozen or so people work there.
even though it's based in england, it's owned by an american, peter dyson, who crossed the atlantic to build his dream.
its chassis is made of stainless steel and aluminum, and its body is pure carbon fiber.
it has an incredible 650-horsepower, mid-mounted v-8 engine developed by yamaha.
but what it hasn't got is abs, stability control, paddle shifters, power brakes, and it only has a wisp of traction control.
so basically it's one of the fastest cars around with almost no safety features.
but all that nothing adds up to something.
[ tires screeching ]
it's got a stronger power-to-weight ratio than a bugatti veyron...
[ engine revs ]
which is better than most motorcycles.
the noble does this insane speed so effortlessly you don't realize how fast you're going.
and that...
[ tires screech ]
can be flat-out dangerous.
this is not a car for the timid.
it's not much heavier than lindsay lohan, but it's 10 times as volatile.
noble has stripped the m600 down to the bare essentials, and it feels like a car that's only a 5-point safety harness away from going racing.
but they didn't get so focused with speed and performance that they ignored the interior.
although minimal, you can tell that they paid attention to the details.
so, basically the $330,000 you pay for a noble gets you one of the purest driving experiences around.
[ tires screech ]
[ engine revs ]
to compare, a ferrari 458...
pretty much the pinnacle of supercar engineering...
has formula one technology that can basically make you 10 times the driver that you really are, where this has the formula one technology of about 1973.
but the great thing about that is that that allows you to be 100% of the driver you really are.
[ tires screeching ]
if you really want to test the limits of your inner driver, you can take what little control the noble has completely away.
all right.
maybe we should turn the traction control off.
the traction-control switch is actually a missile launch button from a british fighter jet...
a not-so-subtle reminder of what kind of hell is about to be unleashed.
[ tires screech ]
good god.
this thing takes so much concentration.
but that's what you want in a supercar, 'cause you want it to push your limits as a driver.
[ engine revs ]
[ laughing ] yeah!
that was a 110-mile-an-hour drift.
that's the problem with a car like this, is the speeds are just so insane.
[ engine revving ]
whoa!
[ tires screeching ]
[ sighs ] all right.
let's put that traction-control button [breathes deeply] back on.
[ sighs ]
i was quickly getting a feel for how unforgiving the m600 could be.
and one thing was clear...
if i was gonna push this car to its top speed,
i'd be keeping the traction control on.
but how does all this function compare to other super cars, like the lamborghini gallardo superleggera, packed with 570 horses and capable of zero to 60 in a blistering 3.4 seconds?
then there's the audi r8 v10 with 525 horsepower and a top speed of almost 200 miles an hour.
to find out how the noble stacked up,
i put it against them in a 1/2-mile drag race.
here's the challenge.
i've got two all-wheel-drive cars.
the v10 audi is ridiculously fast, and the superleggera is one of the fastest zero-to-60 cars i've ever driven.
both of these cars are probably gonna take me on the launch.
i'm gonna have to really focus on not getting too much wheel spin in first, second, or on this surface, even in third gear.
but once we get to fourth gear, the hammer is down.
[ engines revving ]
man: 3, 2, 1, go!
[ engines rev ]
foust:
whoa!
come on!
the superleggera is so fast, but i think i got it now!
yes!
see you!
that is power-to-weight ratio right there.
unbelievable.
that superleggara has won just about every drag-racing competition that we have entered it in.
but it wasn't fast enough to beat the noble.
the m600 had proven itself to be a member of the supercar elite.
[ engine revving ]
it's rare.
it's exotic.
it has insane performance capabilities.
but there's one thing the m600 still doesn't have...
a confirmed top speed.
my goal was to see how fast i could get the noble to go.
to do this, i was gonna need a lot of space, so i went to a retired u.
s. air force base the perfect location for an american-owned supercar built in england.
noble estimates the m600 will do 225 miles an hour, but they've only tested it to 205.
so we're gonna see how close to that 225 number we can get.
we've got 1.7 miles of track.
now, the most important part for me is the braking point.
with no abs, traction control, or stability control, if i lock up the brakes at over 200 miles an hour, i'm done.
having had some time behind the wheel of the m600,
i knew that if i was gonna be trying to hit speeds of over 200 miles an hour,
i would need to make one minor safety adjustment.
don't wear skater shoes.
i've had to go barefoot in this thing just to fit.
[ engine revving ]
[ tires screeching ]
all right.
this corner is critical for maximum speed on the straight here.
i barely made it through that turn.
that's 160 miles an hour right there.
i have to admit, my little pinkie toe is getting stuck in the pedal.
170.
180.
it's starting to get loud.
whoa!
190!
starting to get a little loud again!
200!
loud vibration!
205!
it's moving all over the place!
oh, my god.
this is scary!
215... that's all she's got!
slow it down.
[ laughs ]
[ blows ]
survived.
go!
ferrara:
our worst-car challenge continues.
wood:
oh, come on!
come on!
and later, we find out if anyone would actually buy our hunks of junk.
eric clapton owned this car.
and he is a celebrity.
welcome back to "top gear.
now, before the break,
tanner drove the noble m600 215 miles an hour.
[ crowd cheers ]
very impressive, my friend.
but i was more impressed with the fact that you were barefoot.
yeah.
[ laughter ]
what was that like?
that was flat-out scary.
that was like strapping a rocket onto a race car.
those aren't even street legal in the u.s yet 'cause they haven't passed all the safety regulations.
they're, like, basically too dangerous for america.
oh, so it's just like your yugo, then.
[ laughter ]
no, it's nothing like the yugo, actually.
it's just like it.
i mean, that's a car that shouldn't be allowed in this country.
i think the yugo is easily america's worst car.
mm-hmm.
yep.
the yugo is way better than the mustang ii and the aztek.
that's all that matters.
really?
okay.
yeah.
well, let's find out.
foust:
after adam's victory on the track, it was time to put the mustang ii back in its place.
and what better way to prove its crappiness than to challenge him to another race?
only this time, i'd be on foot.
when you cross this...
ferrara:
okay.
that's the winner.
[ engine turns over ]
lift them up!
foust:
let's go!
bring down!
come on, tanner.
rev your engine.
go, "vroom, vroom!
vroom, vroom!
you got to arch your back a little bit.
kick it up.
kick it up a little more.
all right, here we go.
60 feet.
in 5... 4... 3, 2... 1.
go!
[ engine revs ] [ laughs ]
foust:
yeah!
you did it!
wow.
that car is so uncool that i beat it.
that is pitiful, adam.
[ car door creaks ]
i don't run very often.
this is terrible.
yeah.
just terrible.
and you know what?
i blame you 'cause you picked this car.
i did.
it is the epitome of uncool.
i am so happy.
actually, no, it's not.
that is.
you're a stunt driver.
do a stunt in that car.
i dare you.
i mean, stunts are cool.
if you could do a stunt, in theory, that would make your car slightly less uncool.
in stunt driving, you've got, you know, roll cages and stuff.
yeah.
what can you do in that thing?
i mean, i could do, like, a reverse 180 maybe without it flipping over.
can you do it blindfolded?
sure.
wood:
with adam's mustang ii shamed, it was time to do the same thing to tanner's yugo, and i knew he wouldn't be able to turn down the chance to show off.
wood:
okay, you ready?
foust:
ready.
ferrara:
all right, let's go.
[ engine revs ]
here he goes.
3 miles an hour, topped out in reverse.
[ laughing ] oh, he almost flips it.
wow.
[ tires screech ]
what do you think?
is that a blindfold, or did you join a gang?
[ chuckling ] yeah.
this little thing is nimble as can be.
yeah.
in any other car, it would be cool.
but in a yugo, it's just kind of, "mm.
but in that, it was just awful.
you said, "do a stunt." it did the stunt.
you lost your race.
you haven't done anything in the aztek.
that's true.
you say it's got all this off-road/on-road capability.
why don't you climb that mountain?
yeah, with your tent up.
with your tent up.
the goofy back tent?
yeah.
that's fine.
[ laughs ] really?
i love watching him fail.
i headed off to prepare my tent.
i didn't think it was possible for the aztek to look any worse.
it's caught in the tail.
how the hell is this gonna work?
but i was wrong.
it looked different in the brochures.
there you go.
this is an alternate version of it.
wood:
thanks a lot.
all right.
i'll see you guys at the top.
the car was supposed to be versatile, and i think this is gonna prove it's fairly versatile, you know?
it may be kind of cool after all.
don't let me die in an aztek.
okay!
3, 2, 1, go!
kiss my aztek!
come on!
foust:
put that 185 horsepower to good use.
hold on, baby!
hold on!
[ undercarriage thunks ]
oh, come on!
[ laughs ]
oh [bleep] [bleep]
ferrara:
look at him.
he's either brave or an idiot.
get a little speed up.
there it is.
a little speed.
failure is so epic.
there he goes.
come on!
he's going for it!
is he gonna make it?
oh, come on!
come on!
[ laughing ]
oh, looks like a good spot to camp.
i think i might be stuck.
let me check.
[ tires scraping ]
yep, i'm stuck.
rut, pack up your tent.
meet us back at the track.
pbht.
come on.
not cool.
i think i killed it.
foust:
we were finally on our way to the auction to find out which of our cars would get the most cash.
so far, rutledge's aztek was looking like it could be the worst car in america after being disqualified on the track and failing to show any of its supposed off-road capability.
but it would all come down to this.
who could get the most cash for their car?
people must just think that it's like a comedy of errors here.
they're seeing three of the ugliest cars they've ever seen before all at once.
yeah, this is like the ugly parade through this neighborhood.
it's visual overload, for sure.
oh, my god.
there's a yugo.
oh, my god!
there's a... what is that ford?
oh, geez, and an aztek!
[ laughs ]
on the way, we agreed we could each spend $1,000 on our cars overnight, using our failures as inspiration.
ferrara:
coming up, we modify our cars in an effort to sell them at auction.
[ indistinct shouting, auctioneer calling ]
america is car-obsessed.
and people judge you by what you drive.
but what is the worst car in the country?
we were trying to find out.
the yugo, aztek, and mustang ii had all proven to be equally crappy through the first couple challenges.
so we decided to modify them before we tried to auction them off.
[ engine revs ]
[ tires screech ]
huh?
you know you love this thing.
it's now an official stunt car.
a pocket rocket, as it were.
completely gutted the interior, got a racing seat, racing steering wheel, roll cage, and the five-point harness.
it's nice you had time to just knock off the loose rust up here.
i just gave it a quick buff on the top.
did you do anything to the motor?
put in a high-flow exhaust.
you just cut it off, i think.
[ laughing ] you just cut it, didn't you?
functional hood pins on a yugo.
i do like the rally stripes on the headlights.
i'll give you credit for that.
ferrara:
you mean the electrical tape?
yeah.
it's a style.
you want to know what the best modification you did was?
a gas cap.
i think less is more sometimes.
like that mustang.
really?
i didn't think it could get any creepier.
this is a shelby paint job.
[ laughing ] what?
okay, i ran out of white.
so i had to make...
i had to go with silver.
foust:
it's got some nice metallic in it.
yeah.
it sparkles in the sun.
it'll attract the eye.
okay, so if it wasn't creepy enough, you put a skull shift knob.
wood:
little day of the dead seat covers in there.
ferrara:
and i got a skull shifter.
did you take the two off the back?
yes.
it's marketing.
no.
look at this.
but there's still a hole
where it used to sit.
that's all right.
when they come around to look at it,
i'll just put my thumb on it like that.
you might confuse somebody.
mustang!
the stripes and then the shelby...
it's a shelby-ish.
i think a serious collector would love this car, and we only need one, my friend.
we only need one.
what have you done?
i did exactly what g.m. should have done and make the aztek cool.
i cut out the fenders here, painted the plastic black.
some beadlocker...
well, it's the beadlocker look.
look at this brush guard.
this looks like something you would go, like, attack a herd of zombies with.
yes!
ferrara:
yes.
it's the zombie killer.
it's from "shaun of the dead.
tinted the gigantic ugly turn signals and the taillights.
i got my spare tire on the roof.
how does it drive with these tires and everything?
it seems okay?
oh, pretty good.
it's still...
does it rub?
it rubs a touch.
as long as no one drives it while they're turning.
wow.
it's great in a straight line, though.
gentlemen, let's regroup.
the cars are here.
it is auction day.
so, whoever sells them for the most money wins.
let's get them up there and let people check them out.
all right.
ferrara:
with only 20 minutes before our cars were up for auction, it was time to drum up some interest.
you know who owned this car?
man:
no.
who?
jimmy page.
wow.
jimmy page!
he bought it on the '77 led zeppelin tour in the united states.
he bought this car.
when john bonham died, he couldn't look at it anymore.
it's barely broken in with 140,000, 130,000...
mid-hundreds.
is it original paint job?
yeah.
it was originally done yesterday.
adam told me that somebody had died in your vehicle.
what the hell?
once you get this, you're opening the door to weekend racing.
this is a career for somebody waiting to happen.
[ laughs ]
what would you think is a deal to take this home today?
12.
$1,200?
12.
$12,000?
thousand, yeah.
$12,000.
yeah.
yes.
i don't know why.
i thought you were gonna say $1,200.
no.
i thought you meant for the tires.
[ laughs ] that's what i meant.
[ cheers and applause ]
now it's time for "big star, small car.
and you know our big star from the "harold and kumar" movies.
kal penn!
thank you.
[ crowd cheering ] thanks for having me.
it's good to be here.
i'm glad you're here.
thank you, guys.
all right.
so, you got the car.
yes.
have you ever been on a track before?
no, never.
ah.
so, this will be your first time.
you excited?
i'm very excited.
all right.
how do you think you're gonna do?
i think i'm not gonna do too well.
you know, i don't drive stick.
you don't drive stick?
no.
[ laughter ]
that's the only ridicule i get?
then that's not so bad.
[ laughter ]
i thought i was gonna be fully ridiculed more than that.
well, let's see how it goes.
all right.
mount up.
good luck, my friend.
yeah, thank you.
[ crowd cheers ]
all right, the time to beat is 1:39, set by "true blood's" stephen moyer.
let's see what kal can do.
all right.
he's heading into the first turn gracefully.
whoops.
too close.
aah.
it's not bad.
this is a first...
fourth gear into the chicane.
ooh [bleep]
the man's a trendsetter.
all right, now you've got to pay attention to this part.
the teardrop's pretty tricky.
all right, he's in the right gear.
[ tires screech ]
didn't sound great.
that wasn't terrible.
all right, we're at the halfway point.
this is my favorite part right here.
kal is dead center in the middle of the board.
if he keeps this pace up, he will beat adam levine.
[bleep] ow!
oh!
don't do that.
i totally jinxed that.
and by jinxed, he means dropping the transmission, which is never a good idea heading into cameraman's corner.
he's fighting suzuki the whole way.
all right, now get on it.
[ engine revs ] aah!
oh.
i love the smell of burning clutch in the morning.
he's across the line!
[ cheers and applause ]
kal penn!
come on up, kal.
good to see you.
you, too.
thank you, guys.
man.
yeah?
oh, man.
[ laughs ]
that was amazing.
now, were you scared?
were you excited?
what was your experience?
i was excited.
i wouldn't say scared.
more nervous.
right.
i don't drive stick.
i don't know how to drive stick.
i would have loved to...
well, you know now, right?
oh, i definitely know now.
[ laughter ]
i absolutely know now.
and i drive a prius in real life, so this was awesome.
rea...
[ audience murmuring ]
hey!
[ audience boos ] oh, really?
you like dependence on foreign oil?
[ laughter ]
so, you drive a pri...
ah.
who hurt you that you're punishing yourself?
why do you do that?
i like it, actually.
i mean, look, i live 5 miles from where i work.
right.
uh-huh.
and it takes about an hour to get to work.
mm-hmm.
[ laughter ]
so, you know.
why am i gonna buy something that goes fast?
[ laughter ]
you know, i was amazed to find out that you're a nascar fan.
yeah.
yeah, yeah.
and you drive a prius?
i do.
[ laughter ]
it's crazy, right?
i just got into it the last year, year and half or so.
i'd had a lot of folks i know in dc that were into it.
right.
and i started watching and just kind of learning about, you know, how you actually put 42 cars on a track going 200 miles an hour.
yeah.
and i thought about that when i was out here today.
like, i was out there...
and you're on it just alone.
yeah, one dude alone, i can barely hold it together.
now, was the stig helpful?
very helpful.
yeah.
look, i sat down in the car.
mm-hmm.
i looked at him, and i was like, "hey, man.
uh, so, i don't know how to drive stick.
[ laughter ]
and you can't see his face or his facial expressions or anything.
but you just see the helmet move.
[ laughter ]
that's when i knew there might be a problem.
you heard his eyes roll when you said that.
i heard it.
yes.
if, indeed, he has eyes.
we have no idea.
we don't know.
no.
the "harold and kumar" movies, they're great.
and how do you prepare for your role?
[ laughs ]
you know, the same way that you prepare for anything else.
i remember we shot the first "harold and kumar"...
both in the first and third one,
kumar performs gunshot surgery.
mm-hmm.
and so, i spent, like, two days at the ucla medical center library going over gunshot wounds.
yeah, that's true.
but when i said "prepare," i meant the weed.
[ laughter ] i didn't...
look, here's the deal.
this always disappoints people.
right.
i don't smoke weed in real life.
you don't?
no.
and i...
hey!
that's twice!
[ laughter ]
that's twice.
your dependence on foreign weed?
[ laughter ]
let me ask you this.
do you eat white castle?
i don't.
so, here, this is...
look!
i don't...
i'll bet you're not even indian.
it's true.
[ laughter ]
doo-doo-doo-doo!
[ laughs ]
so, let me ask you...
what has more power, the prius or the suzuki?
uh, what kind of power?
[ laughter ]
were you in that suzuki just going, "whee"?
i think...
here's the deal.
i think the suzuki could accelerate faster.
uh-huh.
i think that's fair.
okay.
but my baby...
you know, my baby can go longer.
[ laughter ] you know?
that was so creepy.
[ laughter ]
i loved that.
you loved it!
that was great.
my baby can go longer." you know.
nicely done.
prius does rule.
you're defending your woman.
i like that.
that's right.
[ laughter ] always.
all right.
well, where do you think you ended up?
in what area do you think you...
oh, man.
um...
no, no, no.
not up there.
not in the 1:30s or the 1:50...
somewhere in the 1:40 range.
i'm gonna say probably between dominic and ed burns somewhere.
wow.
you're narrowing it down.
you've got laser sight.
[ laughter ]
right around the ty burrell mark.
so, you're in this area, you think.
i think so.
okay.
you want to see his time?
[ audience cheering ]
kal penn, who learned to drive a stick this morning...
correct.
[ laughter ]
did it in one-forty...
[ audience oohs ] 9.9.
ohh.
ah.
[ cheers and applause ]
cool.
kal penn!
[ cheers and applause ]
that's not bad.
wood:
coming up, we find out whose car sells for the most cash.
i've never sold a yugo,
i don't think, in my life.
the road ways of america are packed with millions and millions of cars.
but which is the worst?
we were trying to find out.
so far, the gas cap had flown off my yugo, and rutledge's aztek had been an overall disaster.
wood:
okay.
and i'm off the course.
it would all come down to how much they sold for at auction.
[ auctioneer calling ] sold, $6,000!
you bought it.
number 10-15. $6,000.
[ engine revs ]
my supercool, rally-ready yugo was up first.
we'd each spent a total of 2,500 bucks.
i was looking to make a big profit, beat out the aztek and adam's creepy 'tang ii.
i've never sold a yugo, i don't think, in my life.
it's an '88 yugo zastiva.
it's been professionally raced, and let's just sell it exempt on the miles.
[ calling ] on the '88 yugo.
who will give $100?
$200?
[ calling ]
last call.
now $500. $500.
$600.
i got $600.
[ calling ]
and $650.
[ calling ]
last call.
[ speaks spanish ]
the wheels are worth more than that!
$650!
it's a yugo!
at $600, you go, i go, we all go. $600.
[ calling ]
last call.
[ calling ]
last call.
sold!
$600, you bought her.
$600.
how much did you get?
i don't want to talk about it.
ferrara:
tanner was done.
he lost 1,900 bucks on his communist getaway car.
the yugo was looking certain to be crowned the worst car.
come on!
$600?
really?
it's a racecar!
it has a roll cage in it.
it was time for some bona fide american muscle...
kind of.
1977 ford mustang.
and it's kind of shelby-ish, isn't it?
what is "shelby-ish"?
it's a racecar.
how's that?
and it may have been a celebrity-owned classic, but we're not sure which celebrity...
eric clapton owned this car.
and he is a celebrity.
and how about it?
here we go.
[ calling ] 3 grand.
$2,500.
start me out.
and $2,000.
[ calling ]
last call.
[ calling ]
1,000 bucks!
$1,100.
last call!
[ calling ]
hot rod!
$1,050!
[ speaking spanish ]
[ calling ]
somebody died in it.
i hear somebody died in it.
shut up.
[ calling ]
anybody else?
sold!
$1,000.
what bidder number?
number 502.
1,000 bucks.
yes!
number 502.
yes!
$1,000.
i might have lost 1,500 bucks, but i was in the lead.
now all i needed was rut to fail.
this is an off-road vehicle.
man, right here.
look at this.
wood:
yeah!
that looks tough!
really cool, man.
it's a tough one, guys, i'll tell you.
and the tent is included.
you pop the top, it's got a tent back in the back. [ horn honks ]
i'll tell you, it's a neat deal.
it's really cool, guys, and that is green, the color of money.
[ calling ] 5 grand.
[ calling ] 4 grand.
i got $2,000.
[ calling ]
are you [bleep] kidding me?
[ calling ]
last call!
the wheels are worth that!
and $4,200.
last call.
[ calling ]
anybody else?
sold!
$4,100.
number 1056.
wood:
i had done the impossible and made my aztek cool.
congratulations, my friend.
holy [bleep] tanner and his yugo came in last when he got 400 bucks less than adam.
what is wrong with you?
but tanner doesn't like losing.
hey.
we've got a question.
yeah.
there's a guy named, uh, tammer?
tammer?
tanner.
yeah.
tanner?
is that his name?
i don't know.
he came up to me, and they were saying that eric clapton didn't own this car that i bought.
you can't listen to him.
that's the guy trying to sell a yugo.
yeah, but i don't understand something.
on the auction block, they announced that.
yeah.
i assumed that that was true.
i bid the car based upon that.
it's actually true.
wood:
yeah, that's not cool, man.
can you prove that eric clapton owned that car?
can you prove he didn't?
eric clapton owned that car.
don't listen to tanner.
can you get me proof?
can you get me a signature?
i'm with you, man.
that's [bleep]
go pitch your tent.
you don't have to take that.
i've been doing this many years.
go pitch your...
i'll be right back.
eric clapton, my ass.
go pitch your tent.
i can't.
i sold it.
just so you know, let me make a phone call.
and i will be right back.
if you can't get that, i want $500 off.
[ cheers and applause ]
so, basically, let me get this straight.
you lied.
and you sold your car under false pretenses, which i'm pretty sure is illegal in the state of california.
doesn't count.
i'm not from the state of california.
[ laughter ] and i didn't exactly lie.
you did lie.
eric clapton?
i bet he's never even seen a mustang ii.
what i want to know is, did you give the buyer his money back?
let's just say we came to an arrangement.
an arrangement where you sold it for less than the yugo?
true or false?
because i made 1,600 bucks, so clearly i'm the winner.
it's down to you two.
did you sell it for less money than the yugo?
not the first time.
ohh, that's it.
you know what?
the mustang ii is the worst car in america.
that's all we got time for.
__file_terminal__
entered .
that will make me happy.
as preparations ?
this shipment 13 kg .
move it!
are you kidding?
do not start here.
go out , jojo .
we agreed to 50 kg per plane, jt .
it's not my problem where you sell .
danny will be grateful .
is everything all right ?
yes .
same plane , pilot, price .
give it to me , on that plane.
we have 20 drivers have a lead to tucson.
my method is more secure.
you decide , danny.
you are my son , but we do it says dalton .
start to pack , get out within 30 minutes .
come on, guys .
do not move !
hands up !
give me information about my agent !
are you one of us , you traitor !
what the hell was that?
jojo , get the hell out !
drop your weapons!
it is undercover !
drop your weapons !
son of a bitch !
all units .
i have two escapees .
i drive a green car .
moves north.
our agent follows them .
son of a bitch !
cops are everywhere!
let's see , you son of a bitch!
out of the car , danny !
traitor !
drop the gun .
go ahead , jojo .
drop the gun !
man down !
do not move !
are you one of us .
you killed my son , you bastard!
you're dead !
kids are dead!
was over.
was reached for the gun broker !
broker !
do not run from me!
town without law two years later
what hat shelf .
thanks .
give it back .
are you afraid ?
i said i have it back .
come and get it !
what you gonna do ?
would you cry?
come on, cry.
i told you twice.
what, loser ?
i told you twice.
if you plunge at least do it right .
there are all sorts of wood here.
we cypress , pine ...
we treated pine which is my favorite.
who wants to use cheap material better buy from ikea .
look at that.
termites have eaten.
two years should be renewed .
look only .
hello?
be right back .
there something wrong?
something maddy's school .
will you stop it?
i work with you, not for you.
broker , probably nothing .
you're probably right .
i stay calm ?
why would i be calm ?
there is no logic .
i want to solve the problem.
do not worry , dear .
who is it?
do you know him ?
father daughter ?
you're the father ?
mr. broker ?
what happened ?
maddy 's fine.
it's in the classroom .
come with me.
i want to see my boy .
honey, are you okay?
does it hurt?
new shirt was stained with blood.
you must be careful of those little bitches .
what?
want to say something ?
let them escaping.
what are the sheriff here?
cassie came to bodine .
last threatened directory .
their son has special needs .
susan hetch , the school psychologist .
phil broker.
have a wonderful girl .
are you okay?
what happened ?
i warned him twice.
supervisor saw maddy teddy hitting him very hard.
he started it , he's a bully .
maddy , come on.
i 'm guilty .
i taught her to defend herself.
you think it's okay to fight?
no.
but they should defend themselves.
maddy, do you wait a moment out?
yes , ma'am.
thank you.
why did you move here?
is withdrawn for most people.
she wanted a horse.
maddy 's mother grew up around .
it would be a good place to begin rebuilding .
in her file write mother recently died .
last year .
yes .
i was pretty hard .
her mother was sick .
anything else?
why take me?
i think you're different.
are no different.
to him you are.
and nothing happens .
and this goes quiet .
there was nothing wrong .
do it !
ok !
broker !
wait by the car .
what is it?
do not take shit , jimmy.
get in the car , jimmy.
i owe an apology to my son .
relax .
jimmy , get in the car.
a slut i hit my son.
someone owes us an apology.
and how!
please do not say so .
get in the car , honey.
do not turn your back .
get in the car , honey.
hit it , jimmy.
easy .
arrest him !
what the hell are you?
arrest him !
leave it .
what are you doing?
shut up.
let him get away with this ?
get in the car , honey.
does not seem right.
it's okay .
get in the car .
do something .
breathe , jimmy.
yes , just talk.
i have problems ?
no, i saw that he attacked .
had to put it up so bad?
you assaulted the girl child .
and my daughter .
it 's good ?
are you okay?
griffin lived in the old house ?
what do you do ?
is there a reason you ask me ?
maybe just be friendly .
perhaps bored or curious.
it does not matter .
it is my right to ask.
it will not happen again , sheriff.
dad, a group of teachers now look at us.
you are a coward .
what?
i said you 're a fucking coward.
that you are.
you let them fool us in front of everyone.
after half an hour the whole town will know .
i've lost ...
what jimmy?
what?
balance .
nonsense .
he got whipped bad.
mom, i swear .
my father made ?
me stumble .
what's the plan , jimmy ?
now none .
keith watching us.
to hell with keith .
i want to know where he got the money for such a new car?
who?
how what?
who put down .
have you forgotten?
he slammed so bad.
you wanna see my brother.
remain a family matter .
and he is not part of the family ?
you know you're an idiot .
good evening birds .
stop fucking music.
how old are you ?
17 .
get out.
wine and them?
wine and them.
get the hell out!
as for you guys ...
my name is gator bodine .
i hope i did not hurt much, sir.
i just wanted to be clear what will happen if we do not stop this.
we do not want to show disrespect .
it's just for personal use.
undoubtedly .
just fun .
children have fun .
enjoy life.
holidays.
i warn you .
i have a bottle 19 gallons of gasoline in the truck.
will gladly pour neck .
if you ever come back preparing drugs in my town .
stop!
listen carefully.
i do not want to kill children .
get up and running.
in any direction you want .
just do it.
clear ?
now , get the hell out!
get out!
run!
what job amateur .
damn kids .
what are your toes ?
i'm fine , dad .
beware , maddy comes bullies .
dad !
are you serious ?
yes .
look ...
i'm glad you defended .
you set limits with this kid.
snoring cat ?
daddy ?
were you afraid today?
be honest .
it's not wrong to be afraid .
then why not look scared ?
i experience .
night , luthor.
dad ?
yes ?
what do you think of mrs. hetch ?
i think it's fine .
you know what i mean.
yes .
i know exactly what you mean .
good night.
damn !
you need to calm down.
i ?
can a bastard to humiliate us ?
no big deal put it on the ground on your husband .
when talking to keith ...
why was there the sheriff ?
i heard him say i live in the old house griffin.
shit .
want to do something ?
what things?
play with their minds as you do .
chief, i finished tonight?
speak in a moment .
we are glad to see you , cassie.
what is wrong with these two?
ignore them .
fucking chimpanzees.
you look nervous .
i know .
i need something .
dose .
let me calm your stomach.
want to get involved ?
no.
if i can , and you can control .
i 'll take care of broker.
thank you.
organizing parties for birthday children is my specialty .
we will handle this.
thank you.
i'm not good at these things .
do not worry , i 'll handle it.
she likes you, susan .
rarely happens .
you can talk to her sometime?
of course.
maddy hours talking with her mother .
it would be nice to talk to a woman.
i'd be happy .
thank you.
one more thing .
people here say stupid things .
mean ?
it's like in the appalachian mountains .
there is hatred .
and you 're new here .
i think it 's better for maddy
if you settle the conflict how long is fresh in everyone's mind .
they're just two kids who are fighting .
you get to fight two children to the emergency room .
i know that you have emergency rooms .
now you know .
people talk .
decided they 're dodgy .
to settle .
i understand .
looking for something here?
i think not.
what happened in the past ...
i do not want trouble .
your child has made problems .
not ours.
what to do to look all this?
you ?
i want to apologize .
i want to apologize to my wife and my baby girl .
he saw everything.
i apologize for what happened .
and for them to apologize .
and for them.
everything is fine now?
yes.
go away.
we agreed .
put yourself, i'll be right .
a frozen !
damn !
look .
let me handle it.
what's up neighbor?
can i pump ?
i'm almost ready .
i need the pump immediately .
do you understand ?
can i help you ?
no, we need your help.
he finished .
you owe me 12.84 dollars.
i'm not done .
think again .
whatever you think, think again once.
he wants to change my mind .
do not even have a start .
shit .
damn .
let's go behind the building that give you scuffle .
they are the locals ?
for the first time i see them .
who sent you ?
no one.
bring it .
pour it .
yes ?
how to do this?
the child 's teacher in school my nephew !
i do not know !
i'll take care of it .
shit .
dad, what happened to your hand?
there.
yes ...
teedo tried to eliminate rusty fence behind the barn .
i managed .
have a nice day .
can we talk?
stay in the car , honey.
it will not take long.
is there a problem , sheriff ?
we received signal on a beat the station .
you know what?
someone bring charges ?
no, no .
then we have to talk .
what are you, son?
former military ?
former military , ex-- cop ?
what are you?
when i was military
the answer would be " 's classified information .
some people do not need to know .
here's what you need to know broker.
you've got my attention.
smart .
today i will again leave behind?
i think so .
have you made ?
new friends at school ?
yes .
friends .
i learned something cool science class .
do not think .
about cypress river .
can grow up to 30 meters.
interesting.
do not like snakes .
snakes ?
vipers .
... rattlesnakes .
do king cobras , right?
king cobra is encountered far east .
what a relief .
daddy ?
yes ?
why we moved here?
because they are king cobras .
look only .
nice house , nature , river .
what do we need?
internet.
internet?
yes .
anybody home ?
the door is open.
a neighbor comes to visit.
it was tight.
maybe.
you know about " grace " ?
a new friend from school ?
a new word learned .
grace " .
good word.
i think my mom was gracious .
you have a good memory , maddy .
it was.
the clothes , her smile ...
everything.
i miss my mother.
and me.
so much i miss that even tummy hurts .
i feel that he 's worried about you .
and he wants to be happy .
if you're here , i'm happy.
how else ?
do not get left behind.
always try that.
luther !
easy, boy.
daddy ?
dad !
have you seen luther ?
luther ?
no, honey.
do not hear the bell.
i'll go look for him.
go back inside and get ready for bed.
i worry that we find .
go !
dad, i can not sleep without luther .
i know, but i want to try .
i'll find him .
and the rabbit , right?
yes.
i find them both.
everything will be fine .
luther !
phil broker.
hair commodity.
it introduced the motorcycle gang " outcasts " headed by danny turre .
mama mia .
broker.
nice to meet you , agent broker.
luther !
yes ?
i have something important .
what?
come here as soon as possible .
my shift ends in three hours and should lead to shreveport .
well , come morning.
everything is changing .
remember jojo turri ?
son of danny t ?
course.
it was crazy .
it was.
until police shot him 47 times .
losing only son so ...
i heard danny t 's still upset .
casting has not been caught.
and ?
it was an undercover cop .
read .
broker informant did not appear in court .
his name was mc dalton tower .
an in rayville ?
relax .
i think his face is hidden here .
this is our chance .
what are you doing broker ?
stop it!
cut the crap .
i was robbed last night.
do you know anything about this?
i know what you mean .
this is funny ?
you got excuses.
leave us alone .
do not make me come again .
i want my daughter back cat .
cats ?
i do not know anything about cats.
today .
stay away from my house.
do you understand ?
good .
were changed.
look only .
we containers generating exhaust system .
all goes smoothly.
then why do we need danny t ?
i'll give him a snitch in exchange for distribution .
gator , you can not trust the bikers .
give them this and they will kill him .
when you have nothing .
we do business in style .
we're dealing with intermediaries .
only we prepared and will be paid.
it's never that simple.
all you need to do is to learn a few lines and speak with his lawyer danny t.
bullshit .
you have to be humble .
do not ask for money.
give them a gift.
as a favor.
that's a fucking pig .
trust me .
you will negotiate your life.
are you ready for the big day tomorrow?
it's just a birthday .
it's the tenth anniversary .
it's the special .
i guess so .
look what i found hopping around.
hopping around ?
yes , hopping around.
thank you.
it's nice.
not as cute as the original, but you can use .
i thought about doing a party and invite the whole class.
mrs. hetch can come ?
she's the one who organized .
it was my idea , of course.
thanks , dad .
sheryl mott .
what a surprise .
not difficult to find.
old habits do not die .
how are you, sheryl ?
what's this ?
i want to see something .
what?
got a new tattoo ...
you want to show me ?
slightly more important than that.
gift for danny t.
you have ten minutes.
gift ?
so said .
this guy killed my son .
tell me you know where it is.
guess what ?
it's time to go.
he knows .
we 're done tonight.
okay .
you handle it .
ms. klum ?
what do you want now broker ?
want to come my birthday this weekend ?
talk to yourself .
yes , i think.
super .
come on .
teddy had blood on her blouse .
you buy a new one ?
yes .
that we're even.
see you soon , ms. klum .
i heard something interesting.
really ?
tell me what it is.
how jimmy klum took scuffle .
same boy 's .
impressive.
where have you heard ?
in billiards and a beer you can hear everything .
not new.
we reconciled .
what you think?
i have other news for you.
people here do not forget .
it's never so easy.
here are the old school .
someone broke into our house .
it's all old--school ?
it's called revenge dust.
just trying to scare you.
jimmy klum ?
no, he's a pussy .
i know everyone and guarantee that he does not break the case .
but yes brother 's wife .
who is he?
for some stupid reason it's called gator .
he lives near the river .
looks like a boat mechanic .
he can fix anything.
it is rumored that make methamphetamine.
you, i'd be careful with him.
it's dangerous .
the sheriff knows about it ?
if you know ?
they work together .
gator gives his report to keith .
tossed shredded fish .
we work easier .
instead, the sheriff closed his eyes when gator prepares drugs.
bullshit .
thanks for the history lesson .
i grew up around these rednecks .
you should know what you're dealing with.
and if you're interested , gator cafe for breakfast daily at layma .
apparently there's nothing special , but remember what i said.
it's dangerous and crazy .
where are you?
meeting is a fishing hut .
you know i'm allergic , yes ?
you can do it , sheryl .
they sent cyrus hanks .
i know him .
he's an animal .
cold--blooded killer .
do not worry .
look at you.
a beautiful place , cyrus.
i feel good among fat people .
eat as invisible.
and i love lobsters .
hungry ?
honey!
coffee with a little honey .
do you know where this fucking traitor ?
he and his child.
what do you want instead?
i want nothing .
it's a gift .
gift ?
since prostitutes do gifts ?
in recent years, i did get the right equipment , the ideal and perfect location .
all we're missing is the distribution .
you tricked me momentarily , sheryl .
behind this beautiful body there is a genius.
where's the police ?
we have a deal ?
where's the police ?
we have a deal , cyrus ?
you have five seconds before to hit your skull table and floor.
do not mess with me, sheryl .
where's the fucking cop ?
what are you doing ?
clean .
clean ?
it's miserable inside.
i'm glad you noticed.
what are you doing here?
i came to tell you so i took the broker.
i want to stay away from him .
got something for me ?
cassie, i'm trying to tell you something .
stay away from the broker .
got it.
okay .
i have nothing on me so i can not help you .
i think i know crap .
why do not you wash ?
i'm crap .
take a shower and eat something!
do you take a shower , gator !
look at you.
pull yourself together , cassie.
i'm sick of this shit .
sleeping baby , do not want to wake him up .
do not worry .
do not make noise .
i'm leaving.
not any more.
that was it .
enough.
gator .
what are you doing man?
what?
i need a favor.
a favor ?
i have enough work ?
do not give my wife amphetamines .
look at it.
it's a mess .
maybe we should take care of it.
were you sleeping?
as a baby.
what you got for me?
gator bodine .
i checked .
more arrests without convictions .
want more ?
no, it makes no sense .
is a broker.
sheryl marie mott .
motorcyclist was in shreveport .
arrested twice for import of drugs in angola.
in one case worked for your old friend danny t.
suddenly , danny t 's bitch appeared in rayville .
randy , send me a picture .
i'll send you the file by email.
thank you.
i know cyrus?
yes, i know.
you slept with him?
shit .
fuck!
it will be interesting .
we have not officially met .
this is a presentation?
right.
do not ask your name.
for me , reputation is the most important .
for some people .
and you should be .
you have a bad reputation in the area.
you beat the father of baby girl .
you have offended some locals.
daughter him beat his son jimmy.
what kind of parent child would learn such things ?
i do not want trouble .
anything else?
it smells like fire.
if anyone has a problem with me, they keep for him.
i do not want it involved my daughter.
really ?
i lost.
bring you down to earth .
you know the house?
the house where we live.
the house that was broken pathetic coward .
you stole a girl toy , a cat , you cut a tire.
it's my house .
who will come again , i will find there .
all right.
i think you are confusing nothing is clear.
you've been warned bodine .
tell your daughter that he has what to be afraid of such a father .
pleased to meet you.
eat breakfast.
what are you doing gator ?
it becomes personal.
it will happen tonight.
luther .
come here .
how are you, boy?
let the cat down and get up easily.
luther !
luther .
gotcha .
broker.
how are you?
did you hear ?
are you aware ?
can you hear me now?
i bet you do.
there are subtleties in hitting with rebar .
if you swing too hard, you're gonna break your head .
it's a very delicate procedure .
you have done well , lou.
gator will be upset , if you do something stupid.
probably often angry .
you're funny , broker.
an absolute comedian .
clever bastard !
you like ?
i knew you were a cop , broker.
walk like a cop fight like a cop even smell a cop .
gator will come soon ...
i do not care !
i'm the boss now.
did you hear ?
who takes care of the baby ?
girlfriend ?
you hire a nanny ?
or is home alone and waiting for you there 's a bed and read a story.
what the hell?
son of a bitch !
i'll tell my daughter a story the bed .
that's the end of the story.
tell me why you 're leaving .
i owe you an apology , but i do not have time to explain.
what about school?
we will send the file in the morning.
why are you leaving ?
what happened ?
nothing.
have to get back to town .
working on a case .
you said the mother wanted to stay here .
you said , dad .
remember?
things have changed , baby.
sorry maddy.
indeed .
you're a liar.
gator .
you must be cyrus.
sheryl told me about you .
very nice .
where is the bastard ?
5 miles south of highway 12 .
a plantation .
i'll draw a map.
route .
even inside the house.
i need a map.
let's see .
what is this?
how many people ?
it's a party ?
he came with them.
are you ready to show us the way, gator ?
no, do not go .
mean ?
police will seek me first .
i'll be in a public place.
do you see as i shoot rats in his mouth .
what about the baby?
eliminate them all , right gator ?
that's right do not leave witnesses.
it comes to me.
otherwise we agreed .
we show you the way .
i'll bring it back .
i can keep a week .
i owe you .
got something to say?
yes , but now is not the time .
okay then .
i load the horses in the trailer .
hey , sheriff.
how are you, gator ?
okay .
are you busy ?
i made a big sale , i came to celebrate .
congratulations.
thank you.
i have an appointment with pool table .
see you.
thanks for the whiskey .
for nothing .
and stay out of trouble .
yes , sir !
20.
do not you dare disappear.
call your friend .
where the hell is it?
maddy !
come on!
maddy !
dad, what was that ?
hide here .
call the police .
tell them who you are and where you are.
tell them that an armed man trying to invade the house.
go .
maddy !
gator , things got crazy !
how so?
there are too many shots.
calm down and tell me what happens.
i'm outta here .
tell me what happens !
maddy , run!
help !
are you okay ?
please, help me .
he's a man who beat him dad.
listen to me.
do not care about you, they will kill you !
do you understand ?
you must come with me !
son of a bitch !
dad !
get off !
maddy !
daddy, help me !
broker , what happens ?
they attacked the house.
they kidnapped my daughter .
who attacked the house?
six armed men .
trying to kill us .
do you know who took it ?
broker !
i need a doctor.
you'll be fine .
fucking redneck .
broker 's daughter called the station.
broker , your daughter is on the line.
put pressure on the wound .
tell maddy.
maddy , tell me you're okay.
dad , please, get me .
wine, honey.
tell me who you got ?
a woman with black hair .
here's what we do, maddy.
to get you out to be to look for something familiar.
all right.
maddy ?
operator , please have a call from 30 to 30 seconds.
no need .
my phone tracking and send a helicopter.
i have a better idea .
phone tracking .
and helicopter in the air.
obstruction within a radius of 16 km .
40 km and start looking .
radius of 40 km .
looking for a woman with a boat of 6 m , console .
where are the attackers ?
there.
how do you know ?
trust me .
i know .
sheryl , pick up the phone !
we meet in the workshop !
what's going on ?
give me the phone .
what is this?
daddy ?
we stopped .
i am very scared .
hurry .
i see a fence .
we stopped at a barn .
broker !
come on .
come on, it's okay .
give me your hand .
leave me !
shit !
answer , baby.
sheryl , i called !
why do not you answer ?
what happened ?
everything is destroyed .
what does that mean ?
cyrus where are the others?
i have no idea.
you left out there ?
i took the child .
what?
i took the baby .
it's here.
you brought her here?
you brought the child here?
are you retarded ?
sheryl ...
do not!
gator !
do not what , bitch ?
you ruined it !
you can not do this!
you can bring a witness here !
you ruined it !
why bring the child here?
why did you bring her here?
do not touch me !
you brought a witness?
shut up and do it to shut up .
can you do that ?
what are you doing ?
did you hear gunfire ?
no, that shootout ?
the old house griffin.
did not you hear ?
i have not heard anything.
they say people have died and a girl is missing .
this is not no shootout .
better leave.
jimmy , drive it home.
tell me you're not involved .
i'm not involved .
maybe you took something and not thinking clearly .
it's time to go home .
cassie , let 's go.
we also live in this city .
get off !
we have no choice !
please, he is in danger!
let me go!
cassie , it's our job !
get off !
what is going on here ?
do not get involved , cassie.
cassie.
you're crazy.
you are to blame for everything!
do not interfere !
do not mix , cassie !
i'm warning you !
dad !
sit down !
you think i wanted this?
just what i shot sister!
stop the car !
central , open bridge .
again , open bridge .
no!
shit !
close the bridge !
dad !
are you okay?
do not shoot anyone.
he is a child of the bridge.
do not do bad.
dad !
stop!
are you okay , dad ?
get in the car !
i do not want to see this!
you must not do that!
stop!
get in the car !
leave it , please!
get in the car !
get in the car until i blow your head off !
smells like fire?
now i smell like fire?
now it is clear to you?
i'll give you reputation .
she saved your life .
let's go home , maddy .
see you out , danny.
i'll wait .
__file_terminal__
say hello to my little friend.
don't get me involved.
ha.
you've gone fucking viral, mate.
you're all over the internet.
a researcher from a tv show has got in touch.
they want martin to go on as a guest.
my mum's got cancer, and she's gonna die.
mimicry often exists in nature as a survival mechanism.
some harmless snakes have evolved to look like poisonous ones.
the lyre bird mimics the call of other birds to impress the females.
and then i'll, like, wink at the audience, you know, and impress the females.
that's really boring, martin.
i'm a female, i'm not impressed.
it's brian cox, he's a scientist.
i'm doing mimicry about mimicry.
it's intelligent, jean.
i'm pretty sure they don't want intelligent stuff, martin, they've booked an impressionist.
and you've made him a bit too camp.
god, i look old.
well, you're not 16 anymore, are you?
then again, who is?
well, all 16-year-olds.
but they're not 16 for long these days, are they?
your hair is a bit grey, isn't it?
no.
light black.
let me see your teeth.
oh, yeah, they're a bit grey too.
i think you need a bit of an overhaul.
yeah?
yeah.
bit of a tan and a teeth whiten and that.
it'd be a good project for me, that.
be like one of those makeover shows where they do up an old ruin.
oh, time.
ok, so this tv interview will be ten minutes or so, which will get cut down to about five when it's on the tv, and they were asking for a list of the voices you can do.
yeah, i've written that up.
have you had a thought about what your script's gonna be?
yeah, i had a few ideas, but jean poo-pooed them all.
it was so boring.
made him seem even older than he looks.
well, it might be good to get a few bits worked out, and maybe you could do something on the news that day, or...
are you all right, dad?
what if i'm not very good on telly?
you will be.
here we go.
this is my mate's place.
even if you die on your arse, you're gonna look amazing, martin.
you'll feel better once you look the part.
good luck.
bloody hell.
this is your fault, jean.
it's fine.
everything just needs toning down a few notches.
it actually looks racist, but i'm not exactly sure who to.
i needed a confidence boost and this has backfired badly.
it's not that bad.
this makeover is politically incorrect.
i've got to go for dinner with dionne later, it's gonna be a really heavy chat and i've got to turn up looking like a member of the dolmio family!
ever since you got this telly thing, martin, you've gone right up your own arse.
you've become vain.
can we get the bill, please?
i don't...
yeah, hang on.
can we get the bill for these guys?
yeah, he's just getting it.
cheers.
can we get a cab?
i don't work here.
i've got to go over there.
come here.
give us a hug.
why didn't you tell me?
i didn't want to be a burden on you.
and then it never really felt like the right time.
is this why you got in touch about steven?
well, it was partly i knew he wanted to meet you, but, yeah, my condition did help make my mind up.
how long have you got?
it keeps changing.
bloody hell, dionne.
are you all right?
not really.
but yeah.
look, i know this is like a really big moment and stuff, but i've got to ask, what the fuck do you look like?
jean's mate, a so-called beautician, graffitied me like this.
what the hell did they use, creosote?
look at your hair!
i know.
how do you feel about it all?
you angry?
i was, but not now.
there's no point.
i have my bad days.
are you going to do anything mad like parachute jump or get fired out of a cannon?
i don't think so.
i'd like to die in barbados, though.
on a beach, with a cocktail.
we should go back to the beach in bournemouth.
do you remember?
of course i remember.
that was where steven was conceived, martin.
what, on the beach?
no, in bournemouth.
well, let's do it.
yeah.
it'd be nice.
when your new look's faded a bit, yeah?
martin.
who photoshopped you?
it's for the telly, innit?
look, martin, if you don't wanna go on telly, don't do it.
just fuck off somewhere.
i can't let steven down, but i've lied to a lot of people, pretended to be things i'm not.
if i go on telly, i'll be exposed.
you don't look that bad really.
come on, it's your last day.
let's go and nick you some stationery.
you'll never get caught for it, anyway - they'll be looking for a greek fella.
oh, god.
hello?
steven, there's an emergency.
it's martin.
what have you done?
not botox, please.
he's lost his voice!
oh, shit.
all right, martin.
hello, mate.
dad.
could this be psychosomatic?
you know, cos of your nerves?
are you putting this on, martin?
no.
doctor couldn't find anything wrong, he just told him to rest it.
the show's tomorrow, don't know what to do.
i know someone, he treats my dad, he'll know what to do, he's a...you-know doctor.
how do you spell psychosomatic?
what are you limping for?
you've got a sore throat.
i'm not limping.
i know.
that's why i don't come often.
which is also depressing.
and he can't remember when i do come, so that's depressing.
basically, whatever happens, it's depressing.
what's that?
digital picture frame.
i got it for him.
who are they?
fuck knows.
they came with the frame.
i wanted to put a load of family pictures on there to help his memory, but i never got round to it.
no wonder he's bloody confused.
he won't let me take it away now cos he likes it.
look, denholm, visitors.
all right?
yeah, you all right?
am i all right?
yes, you're doing great.
do you remember who i am?
no.
see, i'm not doing all right.
denholm.
this is your...
son.
it's your son.
all right.
well, thanks for coming.
you been on holiday?
not him, me.
it's so nice to have visitors.
we always say what a beautiful looking family denholm has.
yeah.
is doctor sandhu here?
i need to talk to him.
yep.
i'll just, erm, wait.
what's wrong with your voice?
i've lost it.
have you seen my new nurse?
she seems nice.
hm!
what, have you had sex with her?
i doubt it.
martin?
yes, doctor.
hi, i'm dr sandhu.
shall we have a little chat?
yeah.
so neil tells me you're nervous about going on tv?
and why is that?
because, i suppose, success scares me a bit.
i'm happy having things not go my way.
hm, right.
and i've been living a lie by pretending to be different people.
yeah, neil told me about the irish man.
i never hurt anyone.
i just sometimes wanted not to be me.
but also, my son is my manager, and he wants me to do it, so...
whatever you choose, your son will still love you.
i'm going to give you a tablet.
it will help you relax and i think your voice will come back, and then you can make a decision about what you want to do.
now just swallow, don't chew.
now, i must get back to my patients.
take a walk in the grounds, martin.
it's beautiful out there.
thank you, doctor.
ladies and gentlemen, martin hurdle.
hello, hello.
ladies and gentlemen, martin hurdle.
on tonight's show, ladies and gentlemen, we've got a liar.
sometimes a man has to make a decision.
he stands at the crossroads of his life.
oh, shut up.
what about all those people i've lied to?
hopefully, they'll think you're eccentric or mentally unstable.
you should do it for your son, you could better both your lives.
he can't help his son and he can't save the mother, can he?
i still think she's a bitch for not telling him she had a son for many years.
shut up.
hey, hey, maybe you're not meant to go on tv cos you're a thicko.
you failed everything at school.
maybe you'll always be site maintenance inside.
you've got no star quality.
stop it.
gosh, man, stay cool, stay off the radar.
five minutes on a tv show, it will be forgotten in a week.
what are we, nuts, standing in the woods debating whether to go on a crappy tv show or not?
look, just go on telly, do the show, make a load of money, buy a house and climb out of the shit pile and don't look back.
i come out here to do my pisses.
oh.
will they be looking for you?
do you want me to take you back?
no, i'm not a patient, love, i'm a mimic.
i told him i was a newsagent for the millionth time, and he asked me to bring him some porno mags.
i suppose they can't hurt him.
a lot of them go randy towards the end, apparently.
yeah.
you all right?
your voice seems better.
yeah.
i dunno what that doctor gave me, bloody strong.
oh, i know, he helped me with my anxiety before, gave me these tablets, they're amazing.
i took one and we talked through all my fears, and afterwards i felt like a new man.
that's how i feel.
i wonder what they are.
i dunno.
i bit into one once.
it tasted chocolately.
have you got any more contemporary voices?
a lot of these are really old.
um...
why do impressionists always do the same voices?
terry wogan, ronnie corbett.
well, they're classic voices.
can you do tinchy stryder?
who?
he's on the show, be great if you could nail him.
i can get you a tape.
takes a while to learn voices.
ok, how long?
we've got two hours.
a few days at best.
look, this could make you properly famous, ok, so you need to step up a bit, you are potentially our internet star of the week.
yeah, about that, what's the thing with the dog again?
i kind of missed it.
ok, it's gonna be you versus the dog.
you'll both do your bit, and then the audience will vote.
so you'll be on the seesaw with the dog on the other end.
louis, have we worked out how to keep the dog on the seesaw yet?
we can't tie it down because it's not allowed.
it's cruel.
yeah, but you'll be tied down there because of health and safety.
if they all vote for the dog, it could be quite a sharp drop for you.
what does the dog do again?
it's learnt how to open a fridge.
it went viral like you.
didn't you see it?
no.
oh, hi.
erm, do you want me to be on the stage, because i think i should be really.
no, because of timings.
we're just going to focus on the dog, really.
larry wouldn't be here if it wasn't for me, so...
ok.
i'll let you know if anything changes.
hello, mart, you big tv star, look at you.
hi.
thanks for coming.
did you know i'm up against a dog?
yeah.
i'm a bit pissed off about that.
i'm going on a seesaw.
it's ridiculous.
i'm sorry.
have you seen that dog?
i told you animals are getting braver.
urban foxes are taking the piss, pigeons don't even get out of our way any more.
arrogance.
shut up, neil.
what, are you two going out with each other?
first woman i've really liked for ages who i haven't met on the internet.
well, we're seeing how things go.
that's good.
i suppose.
right, we should probably all go back, they're getting the audience in now, so...
ok.
break a leg, martin.
a dog's leg.
don't.
from tiny acorns, mighty oaks do grow.
that's what i tell all the girls.
martin!
i mean, don't forget about me when you grow into a big arrogant tree.
i won't.
and i won't.
i love you, martin.
i love you too, jean.
your mum and dad are in the green room.
oh, god.
god, you look nervous!
thanks.
bloody hell!
did they do that to you?
no, jean did it.
the make-up lady's gonna try and fix it.
that dog's amazing, isn't it?
bloody clever.
only opens a fridge.
it's like a little person.
you know you have to vote for me, don't you?
yes!
don't worry!
here, what can we say to dionne?
does she know that we know?
maybe just don't say anything.
but we've got her a present.
sh!
we have!
bloody hell, what is it?
a plant.
don't give her that!
why?
because it will outlive her and that will depress her.
not everyone thinks like you do, martin.
i thought it was nice.
it is nice, sorry, but terminal illness is a minefield for presents.
he got her a bloody get-well-soon card!
well, that's all they do!
here he is!
hello, little fella!
oh, get a picture of me with him!
you must be so proud.
you shouldn't really be up here until it's your bit.
ok.
oh, i like how they put your name and larry's name on the door, no mention of me.
yeah.
right.
well, larry, i need the loo.
i'm sorry but i also have needs.
today isn't all about you.
this is bollocks, isn't it, larry?
oh, i am loving that!
ok, ladies and gentlemen, wasn't that amazing, let's have a big hand for larry the dog.
and a smaller hand for larry's fridge.
so next up, the man against the dog, it's martin hurdle.
now you probably know him best as freaky voice guy, the man of a million voices and one major meltdown.
so without further ado, let's let him do his thing and get him on that seesaw.
ladies and gentlemen, let's have a warm welcome for martin hurdle.
__file_terminal__
attitude stable, trajectory firm.
systems check.
we have full function on all navigational systems.
confirmed.
we have full function on all communication systems.
confirmed.
power status?
full function, course is set, we have a clear on mars beacon.
we have a go confirmation on all systems, sir.
thank you, mr raiker.
set hyper drive speed, time distort 5.
time distort 5.
5 and running.
lock in full auto.
i thought maintenance was supposed to have fixed that high d shift vibration.
that's what they said.
that's what they always say.
they don't bother.
nobody bothers anymore.
you'd better identify us to space security.
yes, sir.
this is civil administration ship london.
we are in transit from earth to cygnus alpha, transporting prisoners to the penal colony.
we have federation clearance for direct flight, authority number k 701.
transmission ends.
still studying for your commander's credentials, artix?
yes, sir.
i don't want to spend the rest of my life on old tubs like, i...
i mean...
i know what you mean.
i'm sorry, sir.
i'm going to my quarters.
anything i should know?
there's a report of some meteorite activity about 18 hours ahead ship time.
space met say it should have cleared our course well before we reach it.
well, keep an eye on it anyway.
and mr raiker?
give the prisoners the usual pep talk, and assign them their duties.
my pleasure.
use the highest level of suppressants in the prisoners' rations i like 'em docile.
yes, sir.
err, mr raiker?
sir?
there's a female prisoner on our manifest.
i've noticed that, sir.
yes, well err, be discreet.
yes, sir.
i'm sub commander raiker, and i think there are a few things you should know.
the voyage to cygnus alpha will take approximately 8 months ship time.
during this period, you will obey every order and instruction that is given to you.
there is a punishment scale for infractions, which starts with long periods of confinement in your launch seat.
and ends with the commander's right to order execution.
if you have any complaints, i don't want to hear them.
understand this clearly:
you have no rights whatsoever.
none.
questions?
open it up.
this is the limit of your world from now on.
it has mess facilities, sleeping bays, recreation area.
sort out amongst yourselves how you use it.
there are other rules.
you'll find out what they are when you break them.
that's all.
clear your harnesses, you're at liberty to move.
what have we here?
not a troublemaker, i hope?
i didn't hear an order.
you didn't hear an order, sir.
say it!
i didn't hear an order, sir.
that's better.
what's your name?
blake.
so you're blake?
made quite a name for yourself a few years back.
quite the celebrity.
something of a comedown for a leader of men, isn't it?
molesting kids?
the charges were false.
oh yes, of course.
well, let me tell you something blake.
to me, you're just another piece of cargo.
remember that and you might just survive the journey.
do you understand?
i understand, sir.
good.
you're learning.
let him clear.
do you think this is a good time for me to tell them i suffer from flight sickness?
i don't think they'll be very sympathetic.
i expect they'll find a cure for it, though.
a permanent one probably.
they amputate your head!
come with me.
here goes.
what's your name?
jenna stannis.
unfortunately, jenna, there are no special facilities for female prisoners.
but if you should find things difficult, i might be able to arrange something more comfortable.
that's very considerate of you.
why make it hard on yourself?
why indeed?
[sharp slap]
you'll come round!
i can be very persuasive!
that one's going to enjoy giving us a hard time.
and you've improved his mood no end.
why couldn't you be nice to him?
he's not my type!
you can't afford to be choosy now.
why else would i be talking to you?
thanks.
pleasure.
what've you got there?
nothing.
do you know how those door panels work?
no, not that type.
it's simple enough.
all authorised personnel have their palm prints filed in the computer.
the blue sensor plate reads the print.
if it conforms, the computer opens the door.
neat.
most computer based functions are.
blake, kerr avon when it comes to computers, he's the number 2 man in all the federated worlds.
who's number 1?
the guy who caught him.
you've got nothing to be ashamed of.
d'you know, he came close to stealing 5 million credits out of the federation banking system.
what went wrong?
i relied on other people.
why all the questions?
or is it merely a thirst for knowledge?
not exactly.
having defined the problem, the first step is the acquisition of data.
define the problem then.
how to avoid spending the rest of our lives on cygnus alpha.
that may not be a problem.
i've heard a rumour that these ships don't go all the way to cygnus.
once they're in deep space, they quietly dump you out of an airlock.
you're a fool.
they are on a fixed price contract.
they get paid the same whether we get there or not.
and hyper drive running is expensive.
so they dump us and save themselves a trip.
could it be altered?
what?
the running log.
could the readings be faked?
only by a top line technician.
nobody on this ship could do it.
except you?
naturally.
was it wise to put that idea into his head?
what idea?
oh, he's bright.
he'd already thought of it.
what?
he fixes the log, the crew dump us, pocket the profit, and set him free.
that's immoral.
the cold hearted murdering...
let's kill him now before he can do it.
how much do you know about this type of ship?
not a lot.
converted deep space freighter.
early mark hyperdrive which needs re-stressing by the feel of things.
whole lot should have been scrapped ages ago.
could you pilot it?
i expect so.
why?
once we've taken this ship, we'll need a pilot.
there shouldn't be anything there at all.
it's empty space.
nothing orbits through it, no marked space wrecks, no navigational hazards, nothing.
well, there's something there now, and our course takes us right through it.
what's happening?
full spectrum shock waves.
the last one was only scale 2.
what was the reading on that one?
seven.
put all sections on standby, turbulence alert.
all sections on standby, turbulence alert.
put out the deflector shields, there's some debris too.
deflectors out where's the blast coming from?
somewhere in that top right hand sector.
that's total void!
not now, it isn't.
show him.
i've never seen anything like that before.
can you increase magnification?
we're at the limit now.
what sort of range?
we're about 5 subsecs on the high d grid.
anything coming in on the communicators?
no, static right across the range.
it could be some sort of meteorite collision.
[explosion static]
what the hell was that?
i think it's a damn great space battle.
two fleets, maybe more
we haven't got any heavy combat stuff in this section, have we?
well, they're not federation ships, and that's not our battle.
i want a new course.
take us round it, with a 3 subsec margin from the outer limits of the action.
reading?
scale 9!
shift course now, and we'll take those blasts broadside!
they'll smash the guts out of us!
better that than run into the middle of a war.
manual control, mister raiker.
put the ship on full emergency, all crew to operational stations.
full emergency, full emergency.
all crew to operational stations.
[booming explosions]
keep an eye on me as well, will you?
hey, klein, got a little trick to show you.
have you?
now watch very, very closely, right?
right?
now watch carefully.
and a one.
and a two.
watch closely now.
i got past both metal grilles this time.
it'll work if only i can get him to do it.
he's through there.
if you had access to the computer, could you open the doors?
of course.
why?
just wondered how good you really were.
don't try and manipulate me, blake.
now why should i try and do that?
you need my help.
only if you can open the doors.
i could open every door; blind all the scanners, knock out the security overrides, and control the computer.
control the computer and you control the ship.
then i do need your help.
there's a service channel, runs the whole length of the ship.
every other compartment has an inspection hatch.
the last one opens onto the computer section.
give me one good reason why i should help you.
you're a civilised man, avon.
on cygnus alpha that will not be a survival characteristic.
an intelligent man can adapt.
or recognise an alternative.
i already have one.
a deal with the crew to fake the running log?
you've had 4 months to think about that.
and it didn't take you that long to work out they'd have to kill you afterwards to keep you quiet.
whereas you are offering me safety?
i'm offering you the chance of freedom.
generous, considering mine will be the most important job.
you'll do it then.
when?
now.
[increasing whiine]
[explosion outside ship]
damage report!
all sections report damage, all sections report damage.
section 2.
port deflector shields buckled, sir.
section 4.
the outer hull has been punctured astern.
auto repair circuits?
they're sealing it.
mr artix?
vision panels have cut out but i'm getting blind readings, and an echo from something big and pretty far off.
i can't identify it without a scan.
could it be a ship from the battle fleet?
it's a long way out from the centre of the action, seems to be drifting.
it's my guess that it's being pushed along in the shock waves.
it's running parallel to us.
keep a check on it.
and start working on those vision panels.
here we go again.
[external explosions]
a couple more like that and we won't have a ship to take over.
call in vila.
and gan and nova?
are there any others?
the rest are doped to the eyeballs.
do you think we should get on with it, maybe?
maybe?
don't be nervous, vila.
nervous?
i'm not nervous.
just poised for action, that's all.
you've got an army of five, blake five and him!
do you still think you can take over the ship?
if you do your bit.
what's that?
sealing gel.
if the outer hull gets punctured, this floods into the section and blocks it up.
it goes solid in seconds.
we must have been holed in that last turbulence.
gan, what about waiting.
no!
these blast waves are our best chance.
the crew have their hands full just running the ship.
are you ready?
yes.
make it good vila.
gan.
we'll be ready in exactly 15 minutes.
will that give you enough time?
knock out those scanners and open the doors.
we'll do the rest.
good luck.
luck has nothing to do with it.
you look as if you could do with a drink.
i'm always thirsty, vila
now i want to show you a little trick here.
right, gan you know this one.
now, i'll watch carefully this time.
now watch the cloth carefully.
and a one.
never works first time.
and a two.
one more chance for you, right?
are you watching carefully now?
yeah, right.
one. two. three.
now, that's better.
not bad, is it, eh?
one for you.
how will we know when he's made it?
the light on the scanner.
when that goes off we're on our way.
he should have made it by now.
you think he's been caught?
no, there would have been an alarm.
i'd better get in after him.
you can't.
if it all starts happening while you're in there, who's going to get this lot moving?
he's right.
all right, you go then.
me?
i've got this problem with confined spaces.
there's a medical name for it.
cowardice?
i'll go.
well, let me do it.
i haven't done anything yet.
i'm quite prepared to go, i just don't want to let anyone down because of my, uh, complaint.
i want to help.
what do you think?
all right, let's get him in there.
gan, let's try it with this one.
here it comes again.
hang on.
[increasing whine]
[external explosions]
[hissing air escaping]
help.
damage?
three hull punctures, sir.
all sealed and solid.
ok.
carry on.
what was the force?
down to 9 again.
it's reducing.
not before time.
where's that echo?
it's practically on top of us!
we're on a collision course!
get those scans fixed!
come on!
move it!
prison compartments scanners.
[electrical discharge]
off.
here we go.
ready?
come on, avon.
he's spotted it!
gan!
oh, come on, avon.
the door.
come on.
bring the guard.
open the door.
put his hand on the door.
look, we only need the hand.
if you want to stay attached to it, do as you're told.
all checks complete, the fault must be in the computer.
get down there, mr raiker.
spread out and find the armoury.
jenna?
what?
let's find the computer room.
all the doors are open!
well, perhaps that last shock wave did more damage than we thought!
it looks like the whole system's been disrupted!
let's find out.
blake!
watch out!
[gunfire]
blake!
now!
[gunfire]
close the door!
come on!
quickly!
get up to the flight deck!
tell the old man what's happening!
[alarm]
now what?
cripple the ship!
we've got all the bargaining power we need.
use it!
excuse me!
[alarm dies]
what the hell's going on?
the prisoners have escaped and got hold of the computer.
what?
come on!
find the armoury," he says.
i don't even like guns.
grab the guns!
stay right there, or we'll kill them.
drop your guns!
[gunfire]
move and you're dead!
vila!
i got confused.
hands on your heads.
now move.
single file.
they're still in there?
yes, sir.
[communicator chime]
this is commander leylan.
surrender immediately and you'll be treated leniently.
if not, my men will blast their way in and you'll suffer the consequences.
those are your terms?
yes.
these are mine.
hand over all your weapons to my men.
without the computer, the ship is helpless.
it will remain that way until you agree.
you will then fly this ship to the nearest habitable planet where the prisoners will disembark.
any attempt by your men to break into this room and we'll destroy the computer.
totally.
that's all.
blake, listen to me very carefully.
there's something large, travelling very near us, and we're running blind.
we may be on a collision course.
you're putting everybody's life at risk!
better make up your mind quickly then.
[gunfire]
dainer!
sir?
he wasn't armed.
we were lucky they didn't find the armoury.
we've got most of them back to their quarters.
we're just mopping up now.
so i see, dainer.
some of our men have been injured, sir.
and the prisoners?
we've killed six.
six?
seven.
in the course of quelling a riot and protecting the ship, sir.
very well.
carry on, dainer.
thank you, sir.
i can get them out of there, sir.
how?
i want a free hand to take whatever action i think necessary.
do i have your permission, sir?
all right.
come on!
what do you think they'll do?
their time's running out.
so's ours.
we have less to lose.
you may have, but i value my life!
assuming they do land us somewhere, what then?
find a way of getting back to earth.
back to earth?
that's where the heart of the federation is i intend to see that heart torn out.
i thought you were probably insane.
that's possible!
they butchered my family, my friends.
they murdered my past and gave me tranquilised dreams!
at least you're still alive.
no!
not until free men can think and speak.
not until power is back with the honest man.
have you ever met an honest man?
perhaps.
listen!
wealth is the only reality.
and the only way to obtain wealth is to take it away from somebody else.
wake up, blake!
you may not be tranquilised any longer, but you're still dreaming.
maybe some dreams are worth having.
you don't really believe that?
no, but i'd like to.
you asked me what i was going to do and i've told you.
what you do is up to yourselves.
a new identity.
a job in the federation banking system.
three months with their computers, i could lift 100 million credits and nobody would know.
then let anyone try and touch me.
and the rest?
have the same chance as i have.
you don't really believe that?
[communicator chime]
blake?
switch on your vision panel.
scanner 34.
there's something i want you to see.
you have a clear view of our little assembly, blake?
we see you.
then lock off the scanner and keep watching
[gunfire]
i'm going to kill one of your friends every 30 seconds starting now.
i'll stop when you give yourselves up, or i run out of prisoners.
raiker!
listen to me!
raiker, damn you, those men are unarmed!
the talking's over, blake.
let me talk to leylan!
raiker!
[gunfire]
open the door.
you're throwing away our only chance.
open the door!
hands on your heads.
stand where you are.
raiker's switched off.
tell him we're coming out and quickly!
[gunfire]
move it.
commander, your first officer is guilty of murder.
i demand that this incident is fully reported.
now don't tell me how to run my ship, blake.
everything that happens here is logged and filed with the flight authority.
and they'll take whatever action they deem necessary.
you could have won, blake.
all you needed was guts.
i'll settle for yours!
take him back.
put them in close confinement.
the girl and i have some unfinished business.
or did you think i'd forgotten?
mister raiker!
have you gone completely mad?
put her with the others.
mr artix, get a technical squad in there.
i want that computer fully functional in 10 minutes.
yes, sir.
mr raiker!
this time you went too far.
there'll be an official inquiry.
naturally, sir and i'm sure you'll confirm that i was acting with your full authority.
there were other officers present who heard you give me permission to do what was necessary.
everything that was said or done by everybody, including me, will be in my report.
how do you feel?
sick.
so you should.
what a fiasco.
you could take over the ship, you said, if i did my bit.
well, i did my bit, and what happened?
your troops bumble around looking for someone to surrender to, and when they succeed, you follow suit.
what do you think they'll do to us?
something unfriendly.
for a while, i really thought we'd made it.
it was my fault.
we know.
i'll try and do better next time.
we had one chance.
you wasted it.
there won't be a next time.
in which case, you can die content.
content?
knowing you were right.
we have power back, sir.
about time.
we have normal functions on all systems.
they're phasing them in now.
have we got scan yet?
not yet.
get me a blind reading on that echo.
it's very close.
these readings have got to be wrong!
we've got the scan back.
right, get me a picture.
i don't believe it!
take us in as close as you can, mr raiker.
yes, sir.
where could it have come from?
i've never seen a ship like that before in my life.
she's drifting, mr raiker.
maintain this distance.
right, sir
try and make contact, mr artix;
sound and vision.
this is civil administration ship london out of earth bound for cygnus alpha.
please identify yourself.
[static]
i reckon she was involved in that space battle we picked up.
she got caught in the big blast and the crew were either killed or got out in the life rockets.
it's possible.
no visible sign of damage, though.
no sign of life either.
well, if she's been completely abandoned.
we could put on a boarding party.
you know how much that ship would be worth if we could get her to a federation planet?
millions of credits.
millions!
leave a skeleton crew on it.
we could do that.
it's got to be worth a try!
yes it has.
[communicator chime]
section 4?
stand by to run out a transfer tube.
wallace and teague?
sir?
kit out with your survival units.
i'll be with you in a minute.
take us in as close as you can and keep us there.
yes, sir.
good.
transfer tube ready, sir.
all right.
begin extension.
[mechanical droning]
locked on, sir.
air pressure established.
keep your communicators open at all times.
i want a full report of conditions inside that ship.
if there is anyone alive over there, make peaceful contact.
weapons are only to be used as defense.
understood?
.sir.
.all right, in you go.
all right, open airlock.
[communicator chime]
starting along the transfer tube now, sir.
we're against the hull.
it's a hatch entrance.
i'm about to operate the remote lock activator.
no response circuit 1.
no response circuit 2.
no response circuit 3.
no!
wait!
it's opening there's a powerful light source from somewhere.
we're going in now.
krell?
get kitted up and standby to give backup if it's needed.
yes, sir.
we're in some sort of a cylinder.
an airlock, i think it's turning.
it's fantastic, sir.
i don't believe it!
what is it?
what's happening?
we've come out into some sort of flight deck, but it's like nothing i've ever seen before.
describe it later.
give me life support readout.
pressure normal; minimal radiation breathable atmosphere.
good.
is there anybody on board?
not that we've seen so far, but i'm sorry?
what was that?
i didn't speak.
somebody did; somebody said something a ...
[burst ofstatic]
teague, report!
wallace!
where the hell is that backup man?
ready, sir.
right.
get across there as fast as you can.
right.
open airlock.
[communicator chime]
raiker.
let artix take the ship get down here.
right, sir.
i'm in the airlock and it's turning.
i'm inside.
the design is strange to me.
all the flight control positions are empty!
all right.
don't move.
just look around and tell me what you see.
what?
i heard something.
what is it?
it's whispering.
ssshh.
yes.
i hear you.
davor?
what are you?
what are they doing to you?
no.
no!
krell!
answer me!
krell!
now listen to me krell if i have no signal from you within 3 minutes,
i'm withdrawing the transfer tube.
3 minutes!
wait!
we can't give up that easily.
that ship's worth a fortune.
looks like i've already lost three men.
i'm not risking any more of my crew.
then use prisoners!
they've got nothing to lose.
use blake and the other two.
let them take the risks.
why not?
we might save the other three.
right.
at least we'll have tried.
right.
get them equipped and bring 'em down here.
[communicator chime]
leylan.
i'm picking up a focused energy field close by.
i presume its the other ship?
is it constant?
there've been two violent discharges, but after each the source dropped back to constant.
thank you, mr artix.
i hope mr raiker's made it clear to you that you can refuse to do this.
oh yes.
he's also made it clear that summary executions one of our options.
we chose the other.
well, if you're successful, i promise that i'll get your sentences quashed.
and if we're not?
then you'll have no more problems anyway.
what is it that we have to do?
find out what's happened to my men and see if it's safe to send a boarding party across.
all right.
i've had worse offers.
good.
do we get weapons?
i'll toss them into the airlock once you're inside.
very wise.
all right, open the hatch.
open hatch.
[growling and snarling]
get him out of here!
what do you suppose did that to him?
that's what we're supposed to find out.
execution may have some appeal after all.
let's go.
right.
open it up.
it's beautiful.
look at that instrumentation.
a ship like this could go anywhere!
this one is dead also.
[increasing hum]
what is it?
i don't know.
[hum increases in intensity]
you're dead.
those tapes are forgeries.
you're dead!
no, no.
get back!
i must go to him.
[gunfire]
what was it?
i don't know.
i saw my mother.
it was so real.
then something terrible.
but it was my mother.
i saw my brother.
it used him like bait.
i had to go closer.
and if you had, it would have killed you.
that thing took an image out of your minds and then projected it back at you.
but why didn't it affect you?
it did, but somehow i knew it wasn't real.
seems i can recognise dreams.
[communicator chime]
blake.
are you all right?
yes!
we're all right.
but we're still checking.
stay in contact, blake.
get me a survival unit.
what're you going to do?
they're still alive i'm going to make sure they don't get any ideas about staying over there.
raiker!
yes, sir.
blake!
this would account for what happened to the crew.
what is it?
life rocket launch control it's been operated.
but why?
maybe that thing drove them out.
i imagined it was some kind of defence mechanism.
could this ship operate under her own power?
i don't see why not.
but could you pilot her?
eventually i might just be able to make her start and stop.
you've got two minutes, no more.
help her, avon.
what are you going to do?
check the outer hatch in case someone decides to try and join us.
i want a boarding crew kitted out and ready to follow me over.
[gunfire]
shall we risk it?
why not?
[electronic whirring]
[engine hum]
what happened?
slight disagreement with raiker.
and then the hatch closed.
we're on our way.
what course have you set?
name it.
we're free.
we've got a ship.
we can go anywhere we like.
follow the london to cygnus alpha.
then we can free the rest of the prisoners.
with a ship like this and a full crew, then we can start fighting back.
__file_terminal__
[door opens] [whistle blowing on tv]
unh.
what's up, doc?
i need to borrow your tv.
beg your pardon?
i got a date with a cute little filly,
and she's coming over for movie night.
what's wrong with your tv?
it's a 1952 black and white set.
ain't got no surround sound.
ain't got no high definition.
i'm trying to impress her.
sam, i'm not gonna help you lie to some girl
so you can trick her into dating you.
fine.
ooh, what about your nobel prize?
that'd seal the deal.
no.
what kind of weirdo would pretend to have won the nobel prize?
[camera clicks] [click]
pretty good status update, huh?
[laughing] oh, yeah.
i'm gonna get a lot of "likes" on this one.
the looney tunes, season 2, episode 14 "spread your wings and fly
i can't believe it.
zero "likes.
[clicking and beeping]
ooh, one comment.
[click]
isn't that bugs' nobel prize?
consider yourself de-amigo'd,
speedy gonzales.
eh, we're here.
where?
th-the seminar.
you said you'd go with me.
wieb lunk, renowned motivational speaker.
his first book, "walking through fire,
kept me going when i lost my accounting job.
it's what motivated me to take up catering.
you're saying you need someone else to motivate you?
ha!
that is so weak.
[car door opens and closes]
we parked so far away.
i don't think i can make it to the entrance.
[sighs]
of course you can.
you really think so?
i believe in you.
all right.
but just keep motivating me.
you can do it.
ohh.
ahh.
almost there.
ahh.
are you ready to change your life?
let's get one thing straight, bub.
i'm only here for free coffee.
this hokum only works on weak-minded suckers like you.
whoa!
that was amazing!
i'm a changed man.
i can't believe it took so long to see the light.
i'm excited to read his new book,
spread those wings and fly.
i can't wait to fly.
i mean, i've always been a little afraid of it,
but like wieb says, "it's now or never.
i'm gonna sign up today.
uh, for what?
flying lessons.
uh, daffy.
[stammering] i think you're taking the title of the book
too literally.
what are you talking about?
he must have said the word "fly
about 100 times in there.
fly" means "fly,
which is exactly what i'm going to do.
you mean like...
porky, i've told you i'm not that kind of duck.
i'm going to get my pilot's license.
i've already got a driver's license
and a cosmetology license.
that's 2 of the big 5 licenses.
the big 5 licenses?
driver's license, cosmetology license,
pilot's license, fishing license,
and license to kill.
i can't wait to get that one.
now, get out of my way.
i never want to see you again.
uh, what?
well, at least for a while.
wieb said to get rid of any friends or family
who don't support you.
those people are toxic, like mold.
you're mold, porky.
you've been here this whole time,
slowly killing me.
i do support you.
i just think "spread those wings and fly
is a metaphor.
really?
for what?
finding the courage to pursue your dreams,
listening to your inner voice,
having the confidence to try something new,
take risks,
live boldly.
you are so dumb.
dumb and toxic.
flying lessons?
it's in my genes, my blood.
i'm meant to fly.
i'm a duck.
birds are angels on earth.
you don't understand because you're a rabbit,
a rodent, vermin.
you're a garbage eater.
[whirring]
what is that?
lunk formula.
it's a mixture of synthetic carbs
and branch chain amino acids.
wieb says it increases brain function.
[gulping]
might want to put another scoop in there.
i already cut porky out of my life.
i can do the same to you.
i don't want to.
i mean, you're the one
with the house and all the cool stuff.
but i will.
[click]
dvd 4.
how high can you fly?
very high.
right now, i want you to tell me
if you're satisfied with your life.
no.
are you satisfied with your career?
no.
satisfied in your relationships?
no.
all no.
then i want you to stand up
and say it with me.
i'm gonna spread my wings and fly.
i'm gonna spread my wings and what?
fly.
what?
fly.
i--i can't hear you.
fly.
what?
fly.
what?
fly.
do you really need to be doing this right now?
good point.
i should get to bed.
listen to my nighttime nuggets.
your what?
nighttime nuggets.
they're little inspirational bullet points
that subliminally sink in while i sleep.
if you want to watch the dvds, go ahead.
they'll change your life.
no thanks.
suit yourself.
but you'll never soar, my ground-bound friend.
you'll never be a lunkhead.
i don't want to be a lunkhead.
who wouldn't want to be a lunkhead?
[crickets chirping]
wow.
i feel so rested,
so invigorated.
looks like a beautiful day to fly.
what are you wearing?
dress for the job you want,
not the job you have.
you don't have a job.
that's why i'm usually nude.
why is the front door open?
i don't know.
i think someone broke into the house.
is anything missing?
i don't think so.
[gasps] my nobel prize!
unbelievable.
what?
that hillbilly leprechaun stole my nobel prize.
you know a hillbilly leprechaun?
[yelling] yosemite.
yosemite knows a hillbilly leprechaun?
[knocking]
give it back.
give what back?
my nobel prize.
uh, i don't got your nobel prize.
sure you don't.
why do you think i took it?
'cause i came there yesterday and said i wanted it?
and you said, "no," and i left angrily?
or 'cause of my vast criminal record,
which includes breaking and entering?
yep, either of those.
well, i didn't steal your stupid prize.
now, get off'n my property
before i call the cops on you for trespassing.
which is also on my criminal record.
ok.
mm-hmm.
thank you very much.
i really appreciate it.
[hangs up cell phone]
they're sending me a replacement nobel prize.
i don't know why you want it back so bad.
as wieb says,
clinging to past success guarantees future failure.
is that a nighttime nugget?
no, it's a daytime doodler.
very different.
how was your first day of flying?
i didn't even get in the plane.
i failed the physical.
they said i had too many branch chain amino acids in my bloodstream.
i have to take it again tomorrow morning.
i'm going to bed.
be sure and lock your bedroom window.
[crickets chirping]
you're not getting my tv.
you know, paranoia is the opposite of power.
no, it's not.
all i'm saying is,
you need to activate your trust magnets.
just watch the dvds.
my tv!
oh, that is it.
[knocking]
oh, good.
the cops.
someone broke into my house last night
and stole my cowboy boots.
what are you talking about?
where's my tv?
oh, now, you're saying i stole your tv?
you know you did.
oh, i get it.
you stole my cowboy boots.
what?
you stole from me 'cause you think i stole from you.
arrest him, officers.
he stole my boots.
tit for tat.
well, i never titted, so you shouldn't have tatted.
arrest him, i tells ya!
[static] dispatch, it's just a neighborhood dispute
between a rabbit and a, uh...
sort of like a hillbilly leprechaun.
over.
[opening car door and starting engine]
i'm gonna keep my eye on you.
i'm a-gonna keep my eye on you.
good, because i'm gonna keep my eye on you.
not good.
'cause while your eye's on me,
my eyes are gonna be on you.
well, great.
because while your eyes are on me,
and my eyes are on you,
there's no way with both of our eyes on each other's eyes
that you can steal any more of my stuff.
wait.
what?
just stay out of my house.
all right, daffy.
you're clear for final approach.
check.
why'd you just open the cargo doors?
oh, is that what that does?
your nose is too far down.
bring it up.
the nose of the plane.
oh, right.
you're too far east.
come west 5 degrees.
which way is west?
your left.
your other left.
you're coming in too fast.
reduce your air speed.
what's my air speed?
it's on your air speed indicator.
can you be more specific?
you're headed for the trees.
pull up.
[crash]
well, i think that went pretty well.
what do you say we do it for real?
you've had 19 crashes in a row.
simulated crashes.
look, i'm gonna be straight with you.
i don't think you're meant to fly.
i guess sometimes,
when you spread your wings,
they get broken.
wait a second.
wieb says, "the only thing separating
'i can't' from 'i can' is a 't.'
and that little thing before the "t
that looks like a comma, but it's up instead of down.
i can fly.
i don't need a teacher.
i don't need a license.
i've got it all in here.
nope, not that one.
unh!
oops.
what's this guy do?
hey!
aah!
[crash]
not bad for my first flight, huh?
[crickets chirping]
i don't know why you're watching me.
you're the thief.
you brought this on yourself.
you got trust issues.
oh, i've got trust issues, all right.
yeah.
i trust you about as far as i can throw you.
well, actually, i bet i could throw you pretty far.
so, let's just say i don't trust you and leave it at that.
[grunting] [glass cracking]
the success pentagram.
5 points of the pentagram
are visualization,
strategization,
realization,
execution, and diet.
what are you doing in here?
the tv in the living room was stolen
and i need to watch my dvds.
well, you don't need to be under the covers.
wieb says information retention increases
the more comfortable you are.
and right now, i need to retain as much as possible.
does anyone here know anything
about branch chain amino acids?
i was expelled from flight school.
daffy, when are you going to give up
on all this nonsense?
never.
just like the title of this dvd,
winners never quit and quitters always quit.
i am not giving up on my dream.
one way or another, i will fly.
congratulations, flight attendants.
you know there are male flight attendants?
i like the height that the heels give me.
please, pay close attention
to the following important safety information.
to fasten your seatbelt,
place the flat metal end into the buckle
and tighten by pulling on the strap.
your seatbelt should be fastened
low and tight across your hips.
unh!
[baby crying] [kiss]
[sizzling]
[whack]
[laughing] [ding] - welcome to new orleans,
where it's a cool 65 degrees.
we know you have a choice when flying,
and so, on behalf of our flight crew,
we'd like to thank you for flying with us today,
and hope to see you again on your next journey.
oops.
don't forget your coat.
hope you got a good rest.
ok, ladies.
we're in new orleans.
what do we do first?
what are you talking about?
what do you mean?
bourbon street, girl.
let's ditch these heels and have some fun.
daffy, we have to fly back to california.
we have 20 minutes to clean and prep the cabin
for takeoff.
but it took 6 hours to get here.
it'll take another 6 to get back.
that's the whole day.
that's the life of a flight attendant.
[keys clicking] [door opens and closes] - where have you been?
new orleans.
are you wearing a skirt?
yeah, but it's the heels that'll kill you.
i'm going to bed.
we're supposed to fly to boston in the morning.
well, phoenix, then boston.
this girdle doesn't help, either.
[wriggling] [banging]
yosemite.
he took my laptop?
yosemite.
what were you doing in my house?
i wasn't in your house,
but you were in mine.
what?
no, i wasn't.
i was sound asleep when i heard a noise
and saw my record player was stolen.
i went outside to see what's what,
and i see you sneakin' around.
this is ridiculous.
just give me my stuff back.
i told you i ain't got your stuff.
now, stay out of my house, rabbit.
oh, this means war.
[glass breaking] [snoring] [snoring]
[snoring]
you deserve to have everything you've ever wanted.
just get up right now and go take it.
it's yours.
it's all yours.
all you have to do is take it.
take what you want.
take it!
it's yours.
grr!
[snoring]
aah!
ohh!
ooh!
boy, you wouldn't believe the dream i had last night.
you were trying to kill me.
well, i'm off to phoenix.
[luggage wheels rolling]
no, you're off to our neighbors
to return their stuff you stole.
[blink blink]
huh.
that's another dream i had.
it wasn't a dream.
those nighttime nuggets
helped you spread your wings and fly, all right.
right into people's houses.
wow.
the lunk mess is more powerful than i thought.
[doorbell rings]
ecch.
my replacement nobel prize.
huh.
now you've got 2 of 'em.
here you go.
told you i wasn't the thief.
i owe you an apology.
what's this?
[gasps] aww, you shouldn't have.
sorry that it has my name on it.
nah, i got an electric sander
that'll take that right off.
what are we doing here again?
i don't know.
porky's invitation said it was a surprise.
did i miss it?
i thought you were going to boston?
nah...
i've quit being a flight attendant.
i mean, i wanna fly, but it's a lot of work.
what?
i like the heights.
uh... hello, everyone.
thank you all for coming.
i've recently attended a self-help seminar.
which taught me, uh..., the importance of, uh..., stepping outside of my comfort zone and, uh..., trying new things.
it was about flying!
it's so sad.
it's like he's incapable of getting it.
so, tonight, uh..., i'm gonna do something i've always wanted to do, but i've been, uh..., too scared to try.
he is definitely not a lunkhead.
uh-hoo!
now, this is the kind of flying i was ment to do.
i wish i've discovered this sooner.
what a thrill!
careful!
you're going too high!
porky, you got to try it.
this is what wieb was talking about!
not that sad *** you were doing!
porky!
hold the ***!
your airspeed is too low.
hold that ***!
and push on the stick!
push on that stick!
hm...
when pigs fly...
__file_terminal__
radio: 'suspect's heading along an old railway track.
he's now heading back through the woods.'
sir.
anybody been inside?
no.
well, don't, leave it with me.
chris?
it's ok, nobody's gonna hurt you.
you're safe now.
chris, is that you?
ayesha...
what did you do to her, chris?
ayesha?
yes.
ayesha.
bastard.
yeah, are you ready?
we would like to thank everyone for their help with the campaign and their unfailing belief in chris's innocence.
six years he's been locked away.
six years of his life stolen, simply because he happens to be different.
'our thoughts and prayers are with ayesha's family and we would urge whoever did kill her to come forward and end their agony.
thank you very much.'
the words "chance" and "fat" spring to mind.
ok...
i've been thinking of getting into architectural salvage.
what, firewood?
people pay good money for that.
eyelash.
make a wish.
i'm going to be away for a few days, working on the ayesha morgan case.
i know chris taylor was in a secure unit, but i wondered if there was any gossip when you were...
no, nothing.
well, it was a long shot.
i-i was...
i was wondering, maybe when you get back, if you wanted to...you know...
come over and...
nothing complicated, just... some pasta, or...
you asking me for dinner?
well, only if you want...
you asking me for dinner?
if you...
if you eat...bad pasta.
i'd love to.
ajay: 'how's it going?
' 'what going?
can i say something?
no.
if i was going out with someone who'd shot...
it's not who he was then, ajay.
it's who he is now.
even after chris was found guilty of ayesha's murder, his mother refused to move away.
that must take some doing.
hm, yeah.
eve granger and ajay roychowdury.
yep, just here, if you could fill in your details and sign at the bottom.
i'm just trying to say be careful.
i know.
i will.
ted: 'they've reopened the investigation.
i know the di.
ms norton.'
she's better at her job than you'd think.
she's a good bloke.
chris did it, tracy.
i swear it.
norton: 'ted radcliffe led the original investigation into ayesha morgan's killing.
a bit old-school, but a decent cop.
retired now.'
tracy!
'and at the time, his domestic life had been going through a rough patch.
he sought and found sanctuary in a community that regarded him as a bit of a hero.'
yeah, but to marry the dead girl's mum.
takes all sorts, i guess.
ayesha had arranged to meet her boyfriend, nick taylor.
but he didn't go.
sent his brother chris instead.
so we bring chris in...with his mum.
she...
anyway, he denied meeting with ayesha but it was obvious he was a bad liar.
well, he was a 14-year-old kid with... ..learning difficulties or whatever it is they call it these days.
we let him go.
next thing a farmer reports seeing him by one of the haystacks.
when he approaches, the kid runs off.
they found her body under some hay bails.
friends of ayesha came forward, saying chris had flashed at them and made suggestive remarks.
lara and jackie.
yeah.
the girls were both 13.
same age, same story.
which one of them now says she made up.
meanwhile, chris disappeared.
'we organised a search for him.'
found him inside.
but this time, when they interviewed him, his mum wasn't with him.
he confessed to putting his hands around ayesha's neck.
and squeezing until she stopped moving.
confessed.
we found the sweet on her.
ok, we didn't know it then, but tests have proved that it was his saliva.
his sweet, but someone else could have just as easily put it there.
what about other suspects?
well, you know what it's like.
once you've made an arrest, other lines of enquiry...
oh, yeah, course...
there was big brother, nick.
at least he was the full shilling.
although that family are all saints now so i'd like to be there when you try and arrest him.
jake:
hey, i was just about to call you.
well, give me a chance.
i haven't been to the shops yet.
erm...
fish?
i was just actually phoning to thank you for the flowers.
flowers?
what flowers?
didn't you send me some flowers?
no.
jake...
jake, are you all right?
'jake?
er, yeah.
fine.
i just couldn't think of anyone else who'd want to send me some flowers.
brian, out.
if you gave me a few minutes notice, then maybe i could actually hide something for you to find.
now, wouldn't that be a whole lot more fun?
fuck off.
oof!
ted...
there seem to be some files...
and your notebook is missing.
well, don't look at me.
oh, come on, ted.
you're better than this.
you dropped a bollock.
don't make it worse.
if there's someone or something - no.
it hurts when you get it wrong, doesn't it?
no.
what hurts is having it overturned on a technicality.
well, aren't you even going to ask?
what's the point?
look, if you're waiting for me to say i was wrong...
just because they released him.
it's not going to bring her back.
i know you've changed your statement, jackie.
but i'd be really grateful if you could go through the new version just one more time.
but...you've got my statements.
aren't they enough?
why do i have to go through it again.
are you ok, mrs radcliffe?
oh, hi, peter.
yeah.
i'm sorry about that.
you know, just cos he's been released, it doesn't mean...
i'm sorry.
i am sorry.
anyway, how's your sister?
i dunno.
jackie.
i thought i saw her earlier.
have you seen her?
no.
oh, well, maybe i got that wrong, then.
anyway, i'd better...
yeah.
jackie, in your original statement, you gave quite a graphic description of all the things you said chris tried to do to you.
but...
he didn't.
it wasn't true.
when i saw...you know...
lara was suddenly being taken off in police cars, staying in hotels...
all the attention.
yeah.
just wanted a piece of it, that was all.
i never thought...
and at 13...
you don't, really, do you?
then, of course, once you start lying... the last thing you want is to be caught out.
but at least he's out now...
chris...
i know you've gone over what happened many times, but if there's any detail that sticks out, anything new - even if it's only a suspicion...
no.
do you know the background?
all the wicklow, jake osbourne...
eve, you're not the only person who's ever spoken to brian wicklow.
as for jake osbourne...
i think he's worked out it's jake who's been helping us unlock his mind.
maybe.
but somehow i can't see wicklow sending flowers.
i've come to say sorry.
because i thought chris...
i've said some terrible things.
come in.
go through.
before we start, lara, is there anything you want to say?
like what?
jackie gave a statement similar to yours which she now says she made up.
i didn't make mine up.
right.
look, he did those things to me.
or at least tried to.
are you sure?
sometimes when we look back at things as an adult,
what's not to understand?
look, he took his dick out and said he wanted to "make sexy" with me.
then, when i said no, obviously, he tried to put his hands round my neck.
chris!
chris, there's someone to see you!
it's tracy.
ayesha.
norton:
obviously it's not but for security, mainly yours, he'll be kept on an isolation ward.
eve:
it's possible brian arranged to be stabbed either to escape or to commit some other atrocity.
apart from the child whose neck he simply broke, he injected his victims with muscle relaxant and kept them alive for several hours.
so, no female doctors or nurses are to enter the room.
no conversation.
no medication, no needles, nothing, unless it's required for his own treatment, ok?
sorry!
do i know you?
do i?
yeah.
ally.
it's ally.
i wrote to you.
you wrote to me.
i'm your...
little patch of blue sky".
look, here.
see?
i've got...
there.
these letters.
you wrote them.
erm, i don't think...
well, i know that some of my letters didn't get through towards the end.
before, you know, you were... ..released.
so what exactly brings you here?
i mean, how did you even find where i live?
oh...
the flowers.
they were from you?
writing to me was an incredibly kind thing for you to do.
but?
well, whatever i needed then... it's different now.
i'm sorry.
besides, from your letter and... ..your name, i thought...
i know what you thought, jake, and to tell you the truth, i'm flattered.
you're not angry with me, are you, jake?
no, course not.
eve...
what, no grapes?
not even flowers for poor algernon?
brian...
have i said the wrong thing?
no, i was just wondering if you'd sent flowers to anyone.
me?
no, but you obviously think i have.
how interesting.
did you see who attacked you, brian?
no.
no idea who it could have been?
no.
flowers, mm?
some of my less distinguished colleagues love trying to send reminders to their victims' families.
but i've always thought it rather tawdry.
i was going to ask if you had any idea who might want to cause you harm.
but then i thought what a bloody stupid question that would be.
how very true.
specially as i fear eve may now be on that list.
what i find interesting, brian, is not the attempt to have your sister killed in my house, but her reaction to it.
it's quite extraordinary, isn't it?
no matter what you do, her devotion, her love for you, stays the same.
part of me is rather side that you have acquired the skills to be quite so belittling.
another part of me is equally thrilled.
thrilled enough to get yourself stabbed?
you think i set this up?
oh, dear.
i seem to have fallen so low in your estimation, hazel, that i shall have to think of something to change it.
you could always try cooperating.
that's a novel thought.
no-one's come forward but we'll soon have a list of people who were near enough to stab you.
i see.
in that case, perhaps in return for one small favour, an itch i've been unable to scratch.
i'm not asking to be free, but if one of you could possibly...
the side of my nose.
which side?
left.
jake osbourne.
i can smell him on you.
beautiful view.
yes.
if you want me to be a woman, i can be.
i think not.
you didn't mean to shoot your wife, did you?
you just meant to shoot him.
imagine that - having someone who loves you so much, they're prepared to kill for you.
i think you'd better go now.
please...
let me try.
no.
i think the least i can get is a kiss.
norton:
we're not sure wicklow knows where you are, but i think it's a given he will sooner or later.
we could possibly help you move.
yeah, but in an unfamiliar place, everyone's a stranger and every stranger...
besides, with brian...
he knows he doesn't actually have to do anything.
it's living with the thought that one day he might.
and you haven't considered a pre-emptive strike?
no.
wicklow's just been stabbed.
right.
i had to ask.
yeah, sure.
so until we know what's going on with him,
i'd appreciate it if you could be just a bit closer to hand.
pack a bag.
having given me several pints, what, you're now taking it back?
i see.
warned off.
not allowed to speak to me.
surely at least you can tell me what all this is for.
ah, nearly got you.
nick:
by the way, i saw lara before.
you remember lara, chris.
lara.
lara?
yeah.
she works at the pub now.
said the police had been asking lots of questions.
right, who'd like a hot drink?
no, i'm all right.
chris?
yeah.
ajay, i'll see you downstairs.
ok.
hi.
jake...
well...your di asked me here.
oh.
eve...
oh, sorry.
er, i'll just...
boss...
sorry, why is jake...?
we don't know what's happening with wicklow and he's an expert on him.
who knows what he could give us on this.
be stupid not to have him in our pocket.
they're hoping to transfer wicklow to the hospital wing tomorrow.
but, er... ..he knows it was jake who's been helping us.
does jake know he knows?
i don't think it'll come as a big surprise.
how did you get on?
jackie says she made it up but lara's sticking to her story so... who knows?
night.
sara: # as i lay sleeping
# i dreamt i held you in my arms
# when i awoke, dear
# i was mistaken
# and i hung my head and cried
# you are my sunshine
# my only sunshine
# you make me happy when skies are grey
# you'll never know, dear
# how much i love you
# please don't take my sunshine away #
norton:
so you saw her in the morning, but that was all?
mm.
but you were supposed to see her later?
yeah.
what for?
just to meet up.
but you didn't go?
no.
why not?
didn't want to.
so you sent your brother?
yeah.
telling him...?
i don't know, that i couldn't go or something.
what was she like, ayesha?
yeah, ok.
weren't you going out with her?
it was nothing serious.
she was only 13.
what, is that it?
thank you.
jake:
wasn't there something about a sweet in her hand?
norton:
yeah...but it wasn't in her hand.
oh.
was the wrapper on or off?
off, i guess, because chris's saliva was on it.
so...what makes you so sure that it wasn't chris?
i mean...take away his disability and what have you got?
a 14-year-old kid whose hormones have just kicked in, but without the social skills or looks to attract the opposite sex.
no matter how nice chris was, he's not boyfriend material to a 13-year-old girl.
yeah, but surely that applies to hundreds and thousands of kids?
or are you saying, in chris's case, he didn't know any better?
possibly.
or he knew exactly what he was doing.
or possibly he's one of those people who, when confronted with a situation that provokes strong feelings, whatever mechanism people have to stop it from going too far...fails.
sometimes there is just no precursor to that.
physically, yes, ok, he could've killed her, but... to deny it, carry that level of subterfuge for so long...
he didn't deny it.
he admitted it.
under duress.
admitted it because that's what he thought he had to do.
we've listened to the interviews.
they're not pretty.
he was led.
ok.
ok, well... apart from the sweet, this murder seems to me pretty unsophisticated.
almost, child-like.
what do you mean, "apart from the sweet"?
well for chris to unwrap it, and then put it in his mouth, and then put it where he did...
i'd say that was a lot less innocent.
a lot more...calculated.
chris and calculated aren't exactly two words i'd put together.
the body was in a fairly open field.
that time of the year, it wouldn't be fully dark until pretty late.
time of death?
not sure.
erm...
her mum said she was in the house till about nine.
so, between that and midnight.
even then... if you were going to lure somebody somewhere... ..not sure it's the most obvious place.
you think the body could have been staged?
i don't know.
it's possible.
did chris ever describe before he covered her up?
i'm afraid you're going to have to be very patient, chris.
i know you've been asked these questions many times before, but it's the first time for me, ok?
when you found ayesha, what did you think had happened?
she was dead.
something bad had happened.
chris... ..how did you know ayesha was dead?
did you try to move her?
wake her up?
or touch her to...?
dad.
saw my dad dead.
right.
and then what did you do?
covered her up.
why?
so no-one would see her.
not looking like that.
like what?
sometimes it's really helpful if we know exactly how people were when they were found.
what position they were in, things like that.
would it be easier to draw it?
how about...if we use...this?
brilliant.
can you remember what clothes she was wearing?
the same.
and is that how they were when you found her?
can you show me?
i really think that's a bit much...
that's really helpful.
thanks, chris.
'after you covered her up, did you take anything from her?
i went home.
did you see anyone?
no.
did you tell anyone about ayesha?
did you know they were looking for her?
i was going to show them, but the dog...
was she still covered up?
i had something for her.
a sweet.
did you give her the sweet?
that's a lie.
it was never where they said.
i want this stopped.
mrs taylor...
when his father died,
chris put some sweets in his hand for the journey.
it was even mentioned at the funeral!
andrea!
i want this stopped now.
chris:
ayesha.
absolutely.
ayesha...
what did you do to her, chris?
ayesha?
yeah, ayesha, you bastard!
any names?
no.
for once, i think it could be a genuine attack.
although i wouldn't put anything past brian.
just be careful.
jackie's statement.
it occurred to me...
she was 13 right?
everything she said chris did, she made up, yeah?
but...
well, did anything else bother you?
well, apart from being pretty graphic...
i'm no expert on this, but it occurred to me that... at that age, where did she get these kind of words from?
that kind of knowledge?
so...
chris might not have done anything to her.
but it made me wonder if somebody else had.
five names, possibly seven if a couple had long arms.
sorry, but je suis tres fatigue.
if you're waiting in the hope of speaking to eve...
she's busy.
then so am i.
what is it?
what is this fixation you have with her?
unless you've had someone completely at your mercy... the control, the heady power to bend them to your will, make them do the things you want them to when you know they would most certainly rather not.
ah, i see you do know what it's like.
poor eve, suffering at the hands of someone so... ..resentful of beauty.
having been passed over so cruelly in that department.
do you want to know who stabbed you?
i have a little academic curiosity.
beyond that, not really.
the list.
just leave it on the side.
that's very kind.
thank you.
it must... ..doing all this, it must bring back... bad thoughts, bad times.
it's our gain...
but it also begs the question...
i guess it's partly because...
ok, society says i'm a free man.
i've served my sentence, absolved of my crime but nothing i can do or say or...suffer...
..can make up for what i did.
maybe this in some way can redress...
so it's...not all because of eve, then?
still not arrested anyone yet, ms norton?
tut, tut.
ted...
do you know jake osbourne?
what?
he's been helping us.
which is more than can be said for you.
now, if you'll excuse us.
he killed his wife and one of our own.
yeah, and you beat up a 14-year-old suspect with learning difficulties.
i think i'll eat in my room.
right, i think i'll have the steak pie.
i'm sorry.
for this to work...
for this to have any chance... ..i have to tell you about debbie and the man with her and what i did to them.
no, i do.
look, no matter how much i kid myself...
..it's a huge part of my life.
who i was and who i am now.
and i would hate... hate for you to learn from someone else because i know brian.
he wants revenge.
he wants to take from me what is most precious right now.
i'm not looking to excuse what i did, i just...
you have a right to know.
if that's what you want.
yes.
yeah...no...just...
just not now.
was the only bit you made up about chris?
if somebody did this to you, jackie, we'd take it just as seriously now as if it happened yesterday.
i know time doesn't make it any easier to talk about.
but we just need a name.
some arsehole's painted our wall, peter.
oh, dear.
what colour?
well, if i hear anything...
yeah.
yeah, likewise.
the things you said chris did to you, we just wondered if anyone else had done anything like that as well?
or if they hadn't done them to you, if you knew or heard they'd done them to someone else?
chris...he did those things, i'm telling you.
just cos jackie now said he didn't.
this isn't about chris.
if i tell you about someone else...
..it doesn't mean that...
..you know, with ayesha and everything.
no, no, of course not.
ok.
ok, it's ok.
we've got a name.
peter frost, is that the best you can come up with?
so you knew he was abusing young girls, possibly even the victim herself?
no, but he was on the list, until we discovered he'd been working that night in manchester.
from what time?
i didn't think you knew exactly when ayesha had been killed?
tracy?
tracy, the police would just like to check something with you, if that's ok?
mrs radcliffe.
the night ayesha died, you said you'd had a row with her and that she'd gone, or you'd asked her to go to her room.
that was what, six?
and she was here until about nine?
can you remember how many times you checked on her?
i didn't actually go into her room.
we'd had a terrible row.
she slammed the door, put the music on.
i went up a few times,
there was no point talking to her when she were like that.
so you didn't actually check she was in her room?
i could hear her moving about, so when it went quiet...
i thought she'd cooled down...
but you didn't see her again from the moment she went upstairs so you can't be sure any sounds you heard were, in fact, made by your daughter.
brian:
eve, how nice to see you.
i bet your day hasn't been as exciting as mine.
i've had all kinds of tests.
sadly, i don't get quite the same frisson as, say, when the shoe is on the other foot.
have you had a look at the list?
i thought if you could perhaps read it to me?
george harris, andrew bushell... ..paul costa, karl jenkins...
..clive short, peter knight... ..raoul khan.
interesting.
karl jenkins.
how is young christopher taylor?
what a tigress his mother has been with that cub.
and if anybody would know about that...
ooh, i take it from that you haven't found who killed the young girl, then.
perhaps i can help?
surely my expertise, knowledge of those who kill, is every bit as good as mr osbourne's?
or is that not the sole criterion?
i don't doubt your ability to empathise with those who kill, no question, but what you lack is any empathy with those you killed.
empathy, oh, dear, not that old chestnut.
what next?
remorse?
you may revel in your lack of it, brian, but it's part of what made you.
it's also part of what unmade you.
can't you see that?
why would i seek help from someone with such chronic lack of insight.
now who's blind, my dear eve?
to his wife and her family, certainly yes, there were flickerings of empathy and remorse, but did mr osbourne ever show any of it towards the young policeman he killed?
i think not.
then again, mrs osbourne, being far, shall we say, "busier
with the pc than she'd ever been with her poor husband, but that's no excuse for the systematic way he set about...
oh.
i see he hasn't told you.
tut, tut, naughty boy!
he must be saving it.
i knew he'd got to you, brian, but i had no idea how badly.
sara taylor has no more asked her son what really happened than you have mr osbourne.
that's not faith, eve, it's fear.
so the actual time she went missing?
i want everything you can find on peter frost.
eve?
lies, weren't they?
mm?
those letters.
all lies.
ally...
how dare you treat me like this.
like i'm some dirt on your shoe, just because you're free now.
no, that is not...
lie to the parole board as well, did you?
they should never have let you free!
eve:
jake?
jake...
he killed his wife and her boyfriend and he just tried to rape me.
call the police.
i am the police.
ds granger.
who are you?
jake?
ooh, jake is it?
yeah...
yeah, i see.
that's very cosy.
isn't it?
mm?
i can see i'm not wanted.
i didn't say you could leave.
erm, right...
probably...
you think brian's connected?
at best, he might have given ally my address as a mild amusement...
he's gone.
thanks.
think i'll turn in.
how's it going with frost?
nothing on him.
tucked up in bed for now but the boss thinks we should nick him first thing.
start with what he did with the girls and then take it from there.
at least there was no mistake with him.
come on, ted, there's no need...
fine officer, pc gaunt.
you'll never know what he did to him cos he's never had the guts to say.
hey...
no, it's ok.
come on, then.
we're all friends here.
what was it?
what was it you did that was so awful that you can't even bear to say it out loud?
i think you should go home, ted.
i've seen you with him.
turns you on, does it, what he did?
ted.
ted...
all right.
eve...
no.
when...
when you ask me to dinner... ..make it soon.
woman:
please keep still during the scan, mr wicklow.
well, isn't this fun?
anyone care to join me?
peter frost?
you're too late.
and what you're looking for is on the laptop.
when did you find...?
five minutes ago.
his girlfriend rang me.
not everyone trusts the police around here.
i'll be outside.
she said that jackie called him that evening but he wouldn't say what it was about.
she knew something was up.
when she woke up this morning he was gone.
and this was on the kitchen table.
must've started when they were pretty young.
yeah.
and you had no idea?
no rumours, no...
doesn't prove he killed her, though, does it?
true.
but it shouldn't be hard to fit him up.
that's a joke.
yeah, i noticed that.
a picture of chris in a field.
big deal.
the field where ayesha's body was found.
chris, he's got much better recall than people think...
so?
has he ever made a suggestion that frost killed ayesha?
no.
but a 14-year-old boy, he may not have known what he saw, whereas now...
the brutal truth, eve, and we both know it, is that, even if he saw frost kill ayesha, the quality of his testimony...
the only way we have a chance of proving this is forensically.
check everything we have for frost dna.
that went well.
i thought so.
you ok?
yeah, mum, don't worry, i'll be fine.
after you, bro.
mum...
peter frost.
i know.
have a good time, bro, and i'll see you soon.
ah, not much luck with your killer, i hear.
bit more luck with your assailant.
far more importantly, what are all these tests about?
oh come on, eve, we're both grown-ups here.
i expect the doctors to lie, but not you.
surely you can break a rule for me, just this once?
hepatitis b can sometimes a precursor to...
liver cancer.
they found a growth.
i'm sorry.
me too.
for when i'm gone, there's going to be no one left to save you.
save me?
if i only succeed in one thing, eve, it's convincing you your mr osbourne...is a monster.
i see.
no, you don't.
you can't see, you've never seen.
if he knows what goes on inside my head, it's because i know what goes on inside his.
we are different only in one respect.
one respect.
he was born.
i was rather more created.
really?
my sister.
we both know she was some architect, but think about it.
what is mr osbourne's excuse?
where were those little tell-tale markers in childhood, his youth?
what turned him from a harmless joe into killing, with such obvious relish?
nothing - it was already there.
he took a shotgun and went up those stairs, eve, because he knew exactly what he was going to find.
i know that sensation, and no matter what anyone says, you never lose the taste for it.
he will seek it out again, eve, the first chance he gets.
if you don't believe me, ask me.
ask me what he did to the man who fucked his wife.
goodbye, brian.
do you want me to take it down?
yeah.
come on.
come on!
all right?
yeah.
come on.
eve:
i don't suppose there's a chance you could say where they've gone?
this about peter?
i heard all about what he did to jackie and lara.
did you ever have any trouble?
no.
what?
no.
it's ok.
no, it's not ok!
chris, he spent six years...!
you know the worst?
you want to know what the worst thing is?
is that i thought that he'd done it.
what kind of a shit brother does that make me?
i love chris, you know... but sometimes... sometimes i just want to say, "what about me?
i'd started going out with lara and i didn't have the guts to break it off with ayesha.
and that day, everything was doing my head in, so i sent chris to do my dirty work.
and if i hadn't...
i don't think you're a shit brother.
for what it's worth, i know people who've done far, far more terrible things.
for those that want it, there's always a way back.
thanks.
a lot of questions we may never find the answers to, but because of the way ayesha was shot and because...
shot?
i-i meant strangled.
and because of the particular, calculated nature of this killing, there may well be others.
at least, though, if we could put this one to bed.
i'm convinced chris may have some detail locked in his head he might not even think is relevant.
you know, it's such a treat for us to be here.
i know.
that's not faith, eve, it's fear.
chris!
so, please don't let's spoil today.
no, tomorrow's fine.
thank you.
we're having a fish supper tonight.
it's chris's favourite.
yeah?
chris, look who's here.
hi, chris.
was that good?
i'll...
i'll see you tomorrow.
what do you want to go on now?
brian: 'what turned him from a harmless joe into killing... with such obvious relish?
nothing. it was already there.'
jake: 'for chris to unwrap it... and then put it in his first and then put it where they did...'
brian: 'i know that sensation, and no matter what anyone says, you never lose the taste for it.'
if he knows what's going on inside my head, it's because i know what goes on inside his.
'sara taylor has no more asked her son what really happened than you have mr osbourne.'
please let's not spoil today.
chris, look who's here.
oh, shit.
answerphone:
'please speak after the tone.'
boss, you're not going to like this, but...
sara's taken chris away.
and i think...
i think he did kill ayesha, and i think she's going to ask him.
no!
eve?
eve...
it's ok, it's ok...
oh, jesus...
eve...
oh, no!
chris...
do you remember when eve showed you the doll and asked you some questions?
and nobody got angry, did they?
no.
well, they'd like me to ask you a few more.
ok?
nick said you would.
go with you?
yeah.
nick said you would.
what?
go with you?
go out with you?
yeah, nick said.
go with you?
go out with you.
i'd rather die.
nick said you would!
so...
how is she?
she's er...
i don't know.
sara: # you are my sunshine, my only sunshine
# you make me happy
# when skies are grey
# you'll never know, dear
# how much i love you
# please don't take my sunshine away #
not supposed to have this on.
boss?
yeah, that's affirmative, over.
are forensics here yet?
no.
i'll let you know as soon as they arrive.
they said it would be about 15 minutes, ma'am.
'sara has taken chris away.
i think he did kill ayesha and she's going to ask him.
and if she does...'
chris.
his mum, she, er... ..gave him pills...
..took a pillow...
oh, no.
please go.
jake: 'if he knows what's going on inside my head...'
brian: '..it's because i know what goes on inside his.'
jake: 'some people do nothing and then they kill someone.
it's the greatest thing they've ever done, with an adrenalin rush like they've never known before, that's never as great the second time.
he either wants to fuck me, kill me or both.
you think i don't know that look?
norton:
at least we can agree the brain is missing.
yeah.
transcript:chocolate sync:innuit
__file_terminal__
are you asking me for dinner?
i'd love to.
if i only succeed in one thing, eve, it's convincing you your mr osbourne is a monster.
weir:
he killed his wife and her boyfriend, and he just tried to rape me!
call the police!
eve?
there's nothing wrong with it.
it's fine.
fine?
it's clean, affordable, near work.
work?
i thought you had another week off.
only if i want it.
have you heard from jake?
no, i haven't spoken to him lately.
it's never going to work, even if...
i just don't see how it can.
and what does jake say?
he knows, i think.
he's always known.
'but you haven't told him?
yeah.
all right.
it's all right.
attwell:
you ok, weir?
bad prawn curry, sir.
stubbs:
corporal weir.
i hope you're not going all soft on us.
sod off, stubbs.
back to the rv.
sir.
oh, bloody hell!
here's to the dinner we never had.
how are the kids?
they're fine.
they're staying with their dad till i get the flat ready.
well, if there's anything i can do...
no.
ok.
how's the head?
oh, it's, uh...it's fine, yeah.
fine.
fine...
what's the news on brian wicklow?
the cancer's taken hold.
he's in and out of hospital.
i'd better get that.
sorry.
boss?
so the dead man was?
ajay:
corporal mark weir.
who found him?
his section.
di norton:
you mean who found what was left of him.
here we go.
di norton, dc roychowdury, ds granger.
col. harrington-smith.
this way.
any idea what happened yet?
some kind of explosion.
beyond that, who knows?
and he wasn't carrying anything himself that could
no.
well, if he was, he shouldn't have been.
attwell and stubbs.
men from mark's section.
they found him.
here we go.
name, rank and serial number.
must have been some prawn curry.
that's awful!
you don't have to say anything.
you don't.
just take care.
how would you describe corporal mark weir?
quiet, well liked, a good soldier.
and he was on his own?
he indicated he was unwell and dropped back.
and wandered into a minefield?
we don't have any minefields.
as i said, we don't know what caused the explosion.
as soon as possible our ballistics boys will take swabs from the residues.
that is, of course, if you'd like.
i think we'll manage.
excuse me.
i think the colonel likes us.
uh...
i'm going to stay here.
you go and check the deceased's personal things.
have you any idea what we're looking for, boss?
i haven't a clue.
they probably won't need us once the dust settles.
sorry.
i didn't realise.
who are you?
lieutenant stubbs.
do you know if anyone's been in here since...
no, sir.
i mean, ma'am.
that's all.
what?
nothing.
alice.
yeah, there's a couple of letters as well.
a dear john, this one.
anything?
a couple of letters look quite interesting.
pathologist, forensic archaeologist, anthropologist, health safety bods and some nutter with a beard who specialises in seeds and pollen.
god knows how long that's all going to take.
there's no point waiting.
..bent over, holding his stomach.
said it was a curry, sir.
and you're not convinced?
it was the start of a long, gruelling exercise, designed to separate the wheat from the chaff.
and you didn't see him after that?
no, ma'am.
we fanned out - me, howard, paul.
and then i shone my torch, and it was...
it's ok.
sorry.
so, lieutenant stubbs, who's alice?
his ex, ma'am.
ajay:
you knew they'd split up?
yes, sir.
was he upset?
at the time, sir, yes, sir.
and recently?
no, ma'am.
nothing troubling him at all?
um, what about, um, enemies?
what do you think, lt attwell?
no, ma'am.
not weir.
would you say he was happy?
did he like the army?
what's not to like, sir?
it was his home, and we were his family.
who's alice?" "his ex, ma'am.
and you don't think it was a mine?
a mine is mass-produced.
something that works like a mine but is not mass-produced, it's got to be a home-made bomb?
with respect, part of the job, yes, obviously includes training in weaponry and to kill - something throughout history we've been rather good at, though it has increasingly become a thankless task.
likewise.
soldier or not, anyone with internet access these days can run up a half-decent bomb.
also present, left forearm, wrist, missing index finger and thumb.
jeff, got any bits of jaw?
i think so.
eve was asking for you.
she sends her love.
mm.
her...
..head is much better, and they've arrested the man who...
he'd become a bit obsessed.
thought me and eve were...
to be honest, at one point, so did i.
ah.
who was i kidding, eh, mum?
things were always complicated, to say the least.
come on, let's get you inside.
mm.
# you always hurt
# the one you love
# the one you shouldn't hurt at all
# you always take
# the sweetest rose
# and crush it till the petals fall... #
jeff, could you take a look at this, please?
what is it?
this is the lower right-hand section of a jaw, and so is this.
i don't understand.
well, they're both bits of the same part, but one belongs to mark weir, and one to someone else.
we'll need some shots of those.
a woman?
the dear john letter we found, from alice, in mark weir's room - any clues where we can find her?
mrs weir?
i'm ds granger.
this is dc roychowdury.
thank you.
i know this must be a very difficult time for you.
i would say weeks, possibly months, but not years, no.
ok.
most of her face is gone, probably because it was nearest the seat of the explosion.
obviously i'll be able to tell you more later.
right, if you'll excuse me...
alice"?
no.
your son never mentioned his girlfriend?
huh.
if he did know someone called alice, she...
i don't think it would be his girlfriend.
mrs weir, was mark gay?
you see, he never really had a father until i met ray, and by then...
would you mind if we had a look at his room?
he...um...he doesn't have a room.
when was he here last?
christmas.
the...year before last.
uh-huh.
had you spoken to him recently?
um, not recently, no.
is there anyone round here he kept in touch with?
no.
right.
well, thank you very much.
oh...
i don't suppose you have any idea whether there'll be any...
sorry, i don't know.
thank you, mrs weir.
i'm very sorry for your loss.
not often, but whenever i could, i did speak to him, and he did have a...friend.
jed.
jed cooper.
mobile rings
yvonne?
thank you.
yeah.
we need to find a jed cooper.
i think that bike's following us.
do you think?
what's more relevant, the fact that mark weir's gay, or the fact that he doesn't want anybody to know about it?
you're a friend of mark weir's.
is that right?
yeah.
i'm afraid we've got some bad news.
he's been killed.
it was an explosion.
i'm sorry.
we're trying to trace another of mark's friends, someone called alice.
i'm alice.
it was just something stupid, that we had between us.
my last name's cooper, so he used to call me - you know.
didn't want anyone knowing he was gay, i suppose.
we're also, um...
another body's been found.
a woman.
not mandy?
mandy?
yeah, she's been missing.
she's my sister.
5'4", slim build, natural - blonde hair.
age approximately late teens, early 20s. 22.
did she have any birthmarks or distinguishing features?
thank you.
she's got a tattoo.
it's like, um, a round japanese crest type thing.
it's been cut out.
great.
how did she die?
well, we're not sure.
she was shot.
we don't know that yet.
she was shot, but not at the recovery site.
look.
the explosion has caused a massive amount of damage, and there are numerous postmortem injuries.
however, there are also injuries to the region across the top of the hips, to the buttocks, the groin, the upper thighs and the lower stomach.
these are consistent with bullet wounds.
consistent"?
i can't say that's what killed her.
look, my job is to give answers based purely on evidence.
all i can say for certain is that something passed clean through her body, a number of times, at or around the point of death.
there was a bullet in her thigh!
yes, but i wouldn't be able to explain how it got there.
you wouldn't expect it to be flat.
a bullet could enter a body and ricochet off a bone and exit nowhere near the entry point.
but in this case there's no indication of the path it took, or why it became so flattened.
at least we agree the brain is missing.
missing?
yeah.
wasn't that caused by the explosion?
something consistent with a spade or axe was used to crack open the skull.
however you get your jollies.
had she been sexually assaulted?
there's no evidence of damage, but there are traces, as yet unconfirmed, of semen in her vagina.
did you know mark weir was gay?
yes.
but i understand it was something he found it easier not to reveal.
so it's still a problem, then?
no more, i suspect, than a woman reaching higher rank in the police.
corporal weir, gay?
never.
if anyone's a sissy round here, it's you, paul.
i think somebody's dead, sir!
sir, sir, somebody's dead!
as for his girlfriend alice...
alice?
who the fuck was alice?
all i did was ask mark if he knew anything.
he said he'd look around.
when did you last speak to him?
a week, ten days ago, maybe.
and?
did he mention any names?
she slept with half the guys that...
you know, she used to call me the camp follower.
they think the dead girl's mandy.
no!
yeah.
really?
yeah.
funny thing
mark was asking me about her.
wanted to know whether you'd shagged her or not.
well, i hope you told him the truth, in all its technicolor glory.
i said no.
no".
well, that's what she told me.
that she turned you down.
that little whore!
turn me down?
huh!
i don't think so.
you believed her?
for one thing, she said the same thing about you.
what?
don't worry about it.
she also said you'd been following her.
yeah.
hm...
and what about weir?
what about him?
dirty little queer.
he's no great loss.
we're ok, though, aren't we?
because we've been through this before, you remember.
don't you?
yes, he remembers.
if it was cannibalistic or ritualistic,
i think other parts would be missing.
taking bits, mementoes, i can understand, but...
did you tell jed the whole of his sister's brain was missing?
there's nothing to suggest mark weir didn't kill mandy and then - pshhh!
suicide, or we all know the peculiar thrill some people get from the scene of their crime.
but if weir boobytrapped the body, then surely when he went back, he'd have been more careful?
maybe he was laying the device.
why now, all of a sudden?
she'd been there some time.
making sure that if she was ever found, every bit of evidence had been destroyed - which has been the case.
i think somebody knew he was going there, and wanted to stop him.
or more than someone?
isn't that what the army's about nowadays?
small, tight, highly trained units that stick together?
'i get the feeling that it was...
it was one person, and if i had to pick one, i'd pick stubbs.'
why?
because for a start,
i'm sure it was him on that motorbike.
what motorbike?
i couldn't really see.
is that it?
no.
it's, um...
well, it's his look, it's the way he is...
i think we've...
i think we've all learned from brian wicklow and from others - others?
so jake osbourne thinks it's just one person, does he?
i don't know, boss.
i haven't spoken to him.
ajay?
keep working on mandy's last movements.
boss.
stubbs.
yeah, ok.
follow it up.
and see what jake osbourne thinks.
well - are you sure?
we have a woman who's been shot.
jake - the same with his wife.
don't you think that's a little...
no.
it's exactly why he could be useful to us.
boss.
start boxing!
ok!
stubbs and attwell, get ready!
howard and paul.
right - box!
it wasn't my idea.
if you don't want
i understand.
i do have some things to do with my neighbours, but... ..there's no hurry, so long as... so long as you're ok.
calm, gentlemen.
stop!
ok, girls.
hell hath no fury and all that kind of stuff.
let's kiss and make up.
sorry, paul.
someone had had sex with her - possibly mark weir, though her brother doesn't think that was likely.
we're waiting for the dna results.
we do know the seat of the explosion was actually inside her mouth.
i think the site was chosen carefully, either as a fuck-you to every soldier that passes, or it's got some other, more personal reason.
she wasn't killed here?
no.
the pathologist thinks she was shot lying down.
any sign of a struggle?
no.
but if there was...more than one,
i suppose they could have held her down, but...
it strikes me as deeply personal, shooting her in the groin, and...
although killing, humiliating a victim by shooting them him there, is sometimes an element of gangland killings.
it wasn't a gangland killing.
so.
she's either dead or incapacitated.
the killer stands over here, going...
or...
or?
people tend to use what they know, what comes to hand.
a mechanic might use a tyre iron or a wrench.
i still have my father's gun.
when i went upstairs, when i opened the door, she - my wife - she threw herself in front of - across - her lover.
i hit her first, but at that range he didn't stand much of a chance.
so.
so she's lying down, and he shot her, there, in that position, because...
..because there was someone on top of her?
both of them somewhat distracted.
more like cold and uncomfortable!
anyway, the killer or killers, well, you can guess where they aim.
that would explain why the bullet was just under her skin - it had passed through someone else first.
so we're looking for a third body?
is anyone else missing?
not that we know of.
we searched the immediate area.
where would you
she was shot in the groin, put there with a bomb in her mouth,
i'd say that was pretty personal to her.
unless, of course, the same was true for the other person.
in other words, the body could be anywhere.
(shit!
what am i supposed to say?
to reach inside my head and pull out my darkest thoughts?
already, sometimes, when she looks at me...
even if i'm wrong, she'll wonder, "how can he think like that?
and if i'm right, it's "how can he...
how can he know that?
yeah...
ah...
mum?
i can't hear you, mum.
hurt.
yeah.
yeah, best avoid that, eh?
as they were having sex?
yeah.
what's the boss think?
she says she'd rather we were looking for suspects than bodies that might not exist.
she's got a point.
oh, thanks!
all i'm saying is, be careful.
part of me thinks she'd rather enjoy seeing you fail.
# kiss me good night, sergeant-major
# tuck me in my little wooden bed
# don't forget to - #
uh!
...
that's better.
i won't tell you again.
hurt.
no...
no, no...
no, no!
the nature of the injuries suggested nelson jeffreys.
the body was in a mortuary in rochdale.
it was thought to be a gang killing.
it's always hard to tell how long they've been in the water.
when was he fished out?
uh, a month ago.
possibly shot in the lower back or buttocks.
should be able to identify the pattern and trajectory against those of mandy.
the bullet found in mandy's leg - if it passed through this body, it'd have his dna on it.
yes, it's worth a try.
good call.
so what do we know about this stubbs, then?
best friends with paul attwell.
interestingly, before they signed up, one of them lost control of daddy's car and hit and killed a pensioner on a zebra crossing.
they ran off, but there was evidence to prove they'd been in the car, though it couldn't be shown they were driving it at the time, or indeed which one of them was behind the wheel.
they blamed joyriders.
look, i'm convinced it's stubbs.
i think we should bring them in.
they covered up for each other once, but this is different.
i think if we can crack attwell
no, no...
go on then.
if you're going to do it, go on.
hm.
didn't think so.
if anything happens to me, it's all written down.
you know, it's funny
i... was just about to say exactly the same thing to you.
the thing that bothers me - if mark weir wasn't involved, how did he know exactly where to dig?
i have an idea about that.
one of the things weir had on him was a global positioning system.
how accurate?
nowadays, to within feet.
excuse me, colonel.
here, look.
nothing on paul attwell's.
but here's ours, and that's stubbs's.
the exact same coordinates.
got him.
he doesn't need a memento.
every time he turns that on, there it is.
oh, and by the way, he's also got a motorbike.
hello?
yeah?
all right.
all right!
eve?
better go and rescue your mate jake osbourne.
he's in a bit of bother.
but i - now, if you don't mind.
hu-u-urt.
i'm not surprised.
i don't think it's in anyone's best interests to press charges, do you?
no.
the di asked if you could spare five minutes.
i see.
i'll
i'll wait.
there are gut instincts and gut instincts.
either way, i'm not convinced that eve's are strong enough.
well, for what it's worth, whatever your female victim did or didn't do, someone took it very personally.
that's something you tend to deal with alone.
and when weir asked questions - but isn't that slightly different?
from shooting someone in jealousy or anger to deliberately luring them to their death?
some people do nothing in their lives, and then... they kill someone, and it's the greatest thing they've ever done, with an adrenalin rush like they've never known, a rush that's never as great the second time.
but that doesn't stop them seeking it.
i think eve's right.
only one does the killing.
and you're convinced attwell's only the bridesmaid?
yes, boss.
for what it's worth, if it'd been my mother, i'd have ripped their bloody arms off.
attwell.
was mandy cooper your girlfriend?
no, sir.
but you knew her?
yes, sir.
did you have sex with her?
yes, sir.
did anyone else you knew also have sex with her?
most of us, sir.
any exceptions?
howard stubbs.
how do you know?
she told me, sir.
what else did mandy tell you about stubbs?
nothing, ma'am.
did mark weir have sex with her?
i always understood he was first.
even though he was gay?
i didn't know about that, sir.
howard stubbs.
you two grew up together, didn't you?
yes, sir.
are you still good friends?
yes, sir.
when you were 15, the police questioned you about an accident in which a pensioner was killed.
yeah.
but that had nothing to do with us, sir.
that was joyriders.
do you know how mandy and her boyfriend were killed?
no, ma'am.
they were shot while they were having sex.
his body was dumped in a river.
hers was buried where mark weir found it.
it appears to have been boobytrapped.
the explosive could have been placed anywhere, but it was put inside her mouth.
what do you think that means?
i've no idea, ma'am.
i think the word blow comes into this somewhere, don't you?
i don't know, ma'am.
what sort of a person would do that?
an accident is one thing, but three people have been killed in cold blood.
worse than that, bits of mandy's body were cut off and taken for
god knows what.
if you're not part of that...
mark weir - look what happened to him.
you know the saying, two can keep a secret if one of them's dead?
paul?
i don't know anything.
i'm sorry, ma'am.
so...
any more questions?
no.
did you have sex with mandy cooper?
yes, ma'am.
how many times?
once.
where?
at her place, or...?
outside.
outside where?
in a pub car park, ma'am.
just the once?
yes.
you didn't try to have sex with her again?
no.
why not?
i believe it's called a one-night stand, ma'am.
did anyone else you know of sleep with her?
yes, sir - everybody, apart from paul attwell.
is this the paul attwell you grew up with?
yes, ma'am.
the one you were suspected of a hit-and-run with?
yes, ma'am.
unfortunately the police got it very wrong.
joyriders had taken my father's car.
are you sure you had sex with mandy?
yes, ma'am.
i think i would remember.
why?
there was something special about it?
or you don't have sex that often?
neither, ma'am.
meaning no disrespect, ma'am, but once was enough.
for her or for you?
somebody must have followed mandy, crept up on her having sex with her boyfriend, and shot them both.
maybe whoever did that found it hard to cope with the fact that not only was she having sex, but good sex.
maybe she was loud, noisy, eager, busy - far busier with her present boyfriend than she'd been with him.
maybe all that was something the killer couldn't cope with.
maybe that's why he chose to shoot them both in the groin.
the boyfriend was of no interest.
thrown away.
but mandy - not only was her skull cracked open, but the killer cut off her tattoo, perhaps as a little reminder of how exciting it had all been.
and just when it looks like no one has noticed, along comes mark weir, asking too many questions.
why not get rid of him too?
and at the same time, utterly demean the body of the woman who'd caused the humiliation in the first place, in one big bang?
what a delicious idea that must have been, hm?
sir, i really don't know how to respond.
what did you do, feed him the coordinates?
joke once too often about how you killed her and buried her in the woods?
when mandy was found, had you been anywhere near that site before?
no, sir.
are you sure?
yes, sir.
then can you explain how the exact coordinates were found on your global positioning system, stored as a memory point?
on my gps?
the only things on my gps were an exercise.
exercise?
yes, ma'am.
we had to recover a series of food caches.
operation fox, i believe.
what, at exactly the same spot mark weir's body was found?
i don't know if it was exactly.
you'd have to check the coordinates.
yeah...
so every single entry is relevant to that exercise?
'fraid so.
how many people would have had this information?
half the regiment.
including mark weir?
how are you, paul?
at least the dna proves
nelson jeffreys was shot while he was with mandy cooper.
i know stubbs killed them.
i'm not dismissing that.
i just think we should consider all possibilities.
maybe you came back to work a little too soon, eve.
what?
maybe you need another week, ten days.
no, but - i've made my decision.
will you be ok?
fine.
eve, i'm sorry.
i'm off the case.
i know.
i know he did it.
not you as well?
all i'm saying is, it's not always bad people who do bad things.
sometimes - come on.
you know he did it.
he either wants to fuck me, kill me or both.
you think i don't know that look?
no, i
i didn't mean
i'm sorry.
i...
i don't know.
i'd been so sure, and i thought... ..if only i could prove it, then...
but once i'd got it into my head, maybe, i don't know, maybe...
..maybe i started to see things that weren't there.
oh, please...
no, you're right.
i don't mean about...
i don't know about stubbs.
i mean, about me.
yeah.
excuse me.
don't be stupid.
give me your bag.
stop, boys!
come on, let's go!
get off me, bitch!
i'm supposed to thank you, am i?
i know some people who would.
have you been following me?
you needed following.
did mandy need following?
yes.
she certainly did.
how bad is it?
it's a scratch.
keep your arm raised.
tell me about the crash.
shh.
you run away.
the police come after you but they can't prove it.
they know it's you, but as long you stick to your story, they can't prove it.
we were young.
and stupid, and best friends.
that's what best friends do.
they don't snitch on each other.
i'd bet it was paul who was driving.
that's the hold you have over him.
but it was you, you, who got the thrill.
she's being horrible to me, nurse.
you wouldn't be horrible to me, would you?
hi.
lucky me.
perhaps you'd like to give me your number as well.
i tell you what.
if you let me...
..and i'll tell you everything, just like i told poor old mark, not that he believed me - well, not at first, anyway.
eve!
sorry.
i didn't mean to...
no, it's all right.
i just thought, you know,
i didn't want things to end, you know, the way...
sorry, i don't have any milk.
oh
i don't have any coffee, either.
sorry.
i was right.
he did do it, stubbs.
he followed me here.
there was, um, a mugging, and we've been in ae, and he all but admitted it.
where is he now?
don't know.
have you called your di?
no point.
i can only prove he followed me.
what about ajay?
oh...
i'll call ajay.
no, jake, i don't know.
no, i don't want to.
if stubbs has followed you
i know you know something!
the skin, the tattoo...
i understand, as a memento, but the brain?
unless he ate it.
i know you know something.
i can't do this any more.
i'm not safe.
safe?
i can't get near you.
i'm scared to touch you.
i tell myself it's for your benefit, but it's not, it...
i mean, look, look where you are.
without your kids, in an empty flat, with someone who murdered his wife and tortured her lover.
and now there's somebody out there, following you, who might want to do you harm.
that's not a life.
i'm calling ajay.
yeah.
no, i don't think i'm being...
ok.
thanks, ajay.
eve?
eve!
shit!
are you following me?
no.
i came to take you up on your kind offer.
see if you really can...
or are you all talk?
why don't you let me buy you a drink?
did you jack off while you watched them having sex, or after you'd killed them?
gentlemen!
this lady says we're a bunch of arseholes.
and she hopes we all get posted to - where was it?
oh, yes, iraq.
leave a message after the beep.
'jake!
it's me.
if you're there, pick up!
please.
please!
it's about stubbs.
'i know you know something,
i don't care how dark or...'
eve.
oh!
oh, shit...
eve?
iraq?
quick.
all right, listen.
listen.
by a quirk of nature - you'll guess who told me this
never mind the apology you owe me,
i think these men deserve better than a cheap remark like that.
iraq?
howard stubbs, i'm arresting you on suspicion of murder.
you don't have to say anything - whoa, you're not doing anything.
excuse me.
no.
he's under my command, not yours.
then ask him to show me his belt.
his belt?
i meant his wallet.
wallet?
oh, i see.
you prefer your money upfront, do you?
ok.
how much, say, for a hand job?
times...
..nine?
whoever killed mandy... ..took a section of her skin, and her brain.
the reason - there's a way to tan leather, to make beautifully soft leather, by dipping the skin in the hot brain of the animal that provided it.
your wallet.
show her!
no, i don't think so.
show her.
oh my god.
yeah!
two!
one more, one more.
let's have another one.
another round, please, mate.
now, then!
ha, ha!
you cheeky little...
right!
# for he's a jolly good fellow
# for he's a jolly good fellow...
# and so say all of us #
i just have.
excuse me.
i'm at the barracks.
yeah, i need a van.
we've got him.
transcript:chocolate sync:innuit
__file_terminal__
it's extraordinary the extent to which a mother will go to protect her child.
what did you do, brian?
do you have children?
then i don't think you want to listen to this next bit.
given the amount of muscle relaxant, it's quite astonishing that she could even move at all.
you shot a police officer.
i have every right to be here.
i haven't done anything against the terms of my licence.
your wife, she was killed instantly.
pc gaunt... your defence claimed your instinct was to despatch him like a gamekeeper would a wounded animal.
that's not true.
i wanted and did cause him as much pain as i was feeling at that moment.
no, that's... not...
you needed something else to sustain you - the thought, the knowledge of what colin was going to do to barbara.
he told you, didn't he?
do it here, do it in eve's house.
he wanted me to find barbara.
it wasn't your idea.
shut up!
hepatitis b can sometimes be a precursor to...
liver cancer.
they found a growth.
i'm sorry.
just have a look down here.
then we'll get your feed.
all right, come on, let's...
where's...?
has anybody...?
my baby's gone from his pram.
has anybody seen anybody carrying a baby?
no.
carrying my baby...
he was in his pram a second ago.
has anybody walked past you carrying a baby?
no.
has anybody...
has anybody walked past you carrying a baby?
has someone seen my son?
somebody's taken...
somebody's taken my son.
has anybody walked past carrying a baby?
what's wrong?
my son's gone missing from his pram.
when's the last time you saw him?
he was in his pram.
what's his name?
jake.
he's called jake osbourne.
have you seen...?
he's gone out of his pram.
he was in...
he was in his pram and he's... has somebody seen my baby jake?
jake!
where's my baby?
jake!
get off!
watch what you're doing!
jake!
where is he?
superintendent bellis?
he's inside, ma'am.
thanks for that.
we'll need some copies of this, all right?
yes, no problem.
excuse me.
hazel.
what are you doing here?
can i have a quick word?
yeah.
just sort that out for me, will you?
sir.
the name
jake osbourne.
no relation, but the one i know shot his wife and a pc.
and he's linked to brian wicklow.
it might be nothing.
go for it.
i hope to god you're wrong.
yeah.
nice little story for you.
usual.
no, you've heard it right.
that's the baby's name.
tablet time.
sorry, but...
thanks.
leave it two hours.
show time.
we're in the middle of a crisis here and this place is like a furnace.
it's been three days, lads.
do me a favour, get it fixed.
jake.
thanks.
that's the senior investigating officer.
this way.
the baby's name hasn't been made public yet.
how long has brian got left to live?
a couple of months, maybe.
we're checking to see who he's been in contact with.
today's one of his regular 48-hour stints at the hospital.
whether that's important...
maybe he had something in place for months.
more cctv.
ok.
ok, suppose it is wicklow...
apart from one last chance to drink from the well of misery he knows that mum's going through, what else?
the knowledge of where he'd hidden emma's body was brian's most precious secret.
if he still blames me for the loss of that...
when his name and mine...
when our names become linked to this... ..how big do you think the story's going to be?
in many ways, that's what's most precious to me - my anonymity, my freedom.
or he might also try a direct approach - hurt those closest to me.
presumably your son.
ok, we'll get hold of him.
keep him safe.
and eve.
maybe if eve was...
what?
sorry.
no way.
absolutely no way.
come on, you know what brian's like.
if he's still under the impression that you and i are...
what?
well, that if we're somehow...
that we're what?
exactly.
so surely there's more reason for me to stay on the case.
correct whatever ridiculous impression he may have picked up.
these other jake osbournes.
do you think they could be in danger too?
yeah, i...
i guess so.
eve.
come on, boss, that's a job for uniform.
stick with her, ajay.
i'll be fine on my own.
thank you, boss.
i don't doubt it.
you know what pissed me off more than anything?
the minute we got remotely close, he bottled it.
said the fact i was even considering having a relationship with him showed how bollocks my life was.
not wrong there, then.
what?
she's wearing a wig.
she knows exactly where the cameras are.
that's him.
that's our boy.
has anyone seen joss armstrong?
i don't think he's in today.
all right.
thank you, mr osbourne.
that's ok.
right, where next?
thanks very much, mr osbourne.
i knew this was going to be a waste of our time.
yeah.
woman:
jake!
jake.
jake, we wondered if you'd seen anyone or if anyone had tried to talk to you in the last couple of days.
someone that you hadn't seen before?
have you seen any strangers?
yes.
i have.
i told you, mummy, i saw a witch.
you did.
yes.
jake!
thanks.
fresh air.
urgh!
that's her.
my name is amy osbourne.
and i'm jake's mummy.
i want to try and speak to the lady who is with jake now.
i don't know your name and i don't know where you are.
but if you are listening, bring him back to me and his daddy.
we love him. please just bring him back.
please!
how did you know?
as soon as he said "witch".
barbara fletcher.
barbara fletcher?
wicklow's sister.
jesus!
so why did she take the baby and not the little boy?
maybe smaller.
easier to hide.
a baby can't talk.
reporter:
here he comes.
oh, dear.
barbarians at the gate.
it's funny how they always seem to know.
don't look at me.
'good afternoon.
welcome to the lunchtime news from itv granada.'
'a major police operation is underway after the abduction of a three-month-old baby from a shopping centre in manchester.'
'baby jake osbourne was taken out of his pram at nine this morning...
get the door!
joss!
yes.
..while his mother was just inches away.'
amy: 'if you're listening, i want to speak to you.'
joss armstrong?
yeah.
a baby called jake osbourne is missing.
anything you want to say?
your biological father is jake osbourne - convicted murderer.
is there any comment you want to make on that?
what are you talking about?
can you stop taking pictures!
it's the same name as your biological father.
stop taking pictures.
go away!
he's done nothing wrong.
he hasn't hurt you or anybody else.
what's going on?
they say jake osbourne is my biological father and he's a killer.
they're saying, do i want to comment on baby jake who's on the news.
tv:
police are checking for links between the baby's disappearance and a killer of the same name who shot both his wife and her lover.
'jake osbourne, who is 43, was convicted of the murders of debbie osbourne and pc john gaunt in 1990.' that's your dad.
it's believed mr osbourne's assisting police in their search for the missing baby.'
there's no-one at barbara's.
get a warrant, ajay.
i want that place turned upside down.
hazel.
how the hell did the press get hold of osbourne's name?
sir?
it's all over the one o'clock news.
hey, wait!
hang on!
oi!
joss, that guy over there's been looking for you this morning.
the guy in the blue jacket there.
i don't know what he wanted.
joss...
are you looking for me...
dad?
no!
joss!
please, joss, leave him.
don't!
stop!
joss!
is it clear?
clear.
it's clear.
clear.
clear!
ma'am, we found this on the front door mat.
make sure everything goes back as it was, please.
you were expected.
brian.
thumbs up.
is that a go ahead?
i want his cell searched.
that's the lot, ma'am.
right.
these are simple enough.
get me osbourne.
see if he can tell us what the hell these mean.
i think we should speak to brian.
jake?
what?
so he can laugh in our faces?
what's wrong?
he's in a e.
any problems if you'd just like to ring us on this number.
ok?
all right, thanks.
you ok?
i'm sorry.
well, there was always a chance.
no matter how he found out or who told him.
here.
no, it's all right.
i can...
the boss wants you to see something.
we think it's barbara.
i'm sorry.
i thought you were picking up joss.
i forgot.
is there some sort of message there?
well, it's got nothing to do with religion.
he just wants to crucify me.
what if it's all misdirection?
he could have been in contact with anyone.
we're all chasing after barbara.
brian tried to kill her.
yeah, but she's obsessed with him and now that he's dying...
it's her last chance to get back in his affections.
and to that end, there's nothing she won't do.
so she has got the baby?
i'd bet my life on it.
i'll get you some water.
we're checking everything - bank statements, phone records, dvla...
even if barbara's only half as smart as brian, you'll only find what she wants you to find, what he wants you to find.
why don't you just put a picture out, release her details?
what if she panics?
gets rid of the baby?
thanks.
the house?
yeah.
we looked.
nothing.
apart from...apart from this delightful postcard brian sent me.
yeah.
i want to see the house.
yeah, we checked that.
those curtains should have been left closed.
yeah.
jake...
we think this could have been brian's room.
going by this, i'd say it died 40-odd years ago.
and it definitely wasn't there this morning?
search team went through everything.
i checked their records.
how the bloody hell did she get past surveillance?
is this another message or what?
maybe she's telling us she's done this before.
we need to find out how it died.
in the meantime...
and to what do i owe this pleasure?
oh, dear, everyone looks so serious.
nothing wrong i hope...
your sister's gone missing, brian.
good.
we wondered if you had any idea where she might be.
she hasn't done anything silly?
she's moved out of the family home.
what my sister does is of very little interest to me.
we think you've been communicating with her.
how have you managed it, brian?
you're looking a little tired, ajay.
you're not being too hard on him i hope, hazel...
where's eve?
busy.
you've lost weight, hazel.
i mean, purely in the sense of gravitas.
not only is your sister missing, we think she has got a child with her.
a baby, in fact.
i don't know what to say.
so you see why we're so keen to find her.
yes, of course, yes.
but i have no idea where she would have gone or indeed what could have possessed her.
oh, wait a minute, i've had an idea.
maybe jake osbourne could tell you.
he's so terribly good at this kind of thing.
i'd like to show you something.
have you ever seen this dress before?
well, well.
yes.
one very similar to this used to belong to my dear sister.
why?
do you know where she kept it?
no.
or why she would have kept it?
in a uncharacteristic rush of blood, my father bought it for her.
normally she wasn't allowed to wear such fripperies, but seeing as it was her birthday.
i guess maybe that made it special.
birthday?
can you remember which one?
12th.
she only wore it once.
wrapped up in this dress, we found the remains of a newborn baby.
i'm sorry?
you didn't know?
can you give us any explanation?
was it a boy or a...?
girl.
he looked pretty shocked to me.
shocked she'd had a baby or shocked she'd kept it all these years?
it can't have been brian's.
not old enough.
if barbara was 12.
look, did she kill that baby?
jake?
i think the only way to find barbara is to kill him.
announce that he's dead?
she's obsessed with him.
this could be the only chance we have of getting her to come in.
a four-year-old boy said he saw barbara in the garden.
that doesn't prove she snatched the baby this morning.
no, of course not.
obviously, if you've got a better idea...
if she really thinks her brother is dead, doesn't that mean she's more likely to get rid of it?
surely if we find her, we've got a better chance of finding the baby.
if this goes wrong, hazel, it's not your job on the line.
you really think that this is our best chance?
don't announce that he's dead.
put him in a coma.
suggest he's only a few hours to live.
mr armstrong, i'm ds granger.
am i under arrest?
no.
then what am i doing here?
there are things we need to explain to you, for your own protection.
come this way.
what?
from my so-called dad?
going to kill me now, is he?
so...we'd like to move you somewhere until this all dies down.
i'm sorry.
my parents...
i'd like to be with them.
yeah, that would be ok.
is he here?
yeah.
i'd like to see him.
ok.
i'm sorry.
there's no need.
i would've done the same thing myself.
sorry, that was a dumb thing to say.
it's just that having thought about, dreaded...
..longed for the chance to see how you are...
can we talk, go for a coffee or something?
i have to go.
my parents are driving up.
this is my number.
call if you need anything.
all right, this way.
brian's slipping into a coma as we speak.
night, then.
night.
you're not responsible, you know.
not for the baby, not joss, none of it.
and you're not responsible for me.
you think my life was perfect before you arrived, do you?
my marriage was screwed up, my kids...
no matter how hard i try, i'm never in the right place.
not for them, my job...
none of it has anything to do with you.
how dare you think it was!
eve...
you shut me out, you cut me off.
no!
no?
then what do you call walking out on me, then?
eve, if the press don't know already, the minute they find out that we were friends, they'll crucify you.
people you don't know will spit at you, hate you.
i mean, really hate you.
you think i don't know?
yes.
so that's it, then?
as soon as this case is over.
you say i've got no life?
well, what about you, stuck up on that hillside?
scared of showing the slightest bit of emotion to me, to joss.
to anyone.
i think about you every minute of every day.
why do they think i'm in a coma?
beats me.
but you'll love this.
well, i never.
finally smoked him out.
imagine waking up to find you as your father.
i was thinking, how much would a recent picture of me be worth?
more than my job.
hundred?
£150,000?
it's not as if i'm going to tell anyone...
i want to see brian wicklow.
ok.
just go and sit down through there and i'll call him.
can you tell us where you've been for the last 24 hours?
out.
out where?
i want to see my brother.
we're investigating the disappearance of a baby.
do you know anything about that?
no.
does the name jake osbourne mean anything to you?
no.
your brother never mentioned him?
no.
are you helping your brother?
desperately trying to get back into his affections?
i think you still feel guilty over his arrest.
my brother never killed anyone.
he told me he burned your toys and soiled your bed.
no.
he spent his whole life trying to revolt you in an attempt to rid himself of your attentions.
more lies.
killing those women slower and slower.
i want to see my brother.
a witness saw you in the garden...
your witness was mistaken.
sit down, barbara.
this was found in your house yesterday.
did you put it there?
it's my house.
your brother told us it was a present from your father.
is that true?
yes.
how old were you?
wrapped up in this dress were the remains of a child.
what can you tell us about that?
barbara.
it was mine.
yours?
yes.
can you tell us how that came about?
when can i see brian?
i've told you.
the baby was mine.
how did she die?
she was born dead.
did you tell anyone?
no.
not even your parents?
no.
who was the father?
was it someone in your family?
how did you feel when your baby died, barbara?
because that's how baby jake's mother is feeling now.
where is baby jake, barbara?
so?
i don't think we're gonna get any more out of her.
do you think the baby was stillborn?
post-mortem tests are inconclusive so far.
there's no sign of foul play.
so what happens now then?
wait here.
brian.
what...are...you...doing...here?
they told me you were dying in a coma.
did they?
and you came running.
they lied.
i told you they always lie.
very clever.
a little beyond you, i suspect, hazel, but at least you have the wit to run with it.
you never get anything right, do you?
brian...
i heard about your little secret.
brian, please.
it doesn't change anything.
really?
how dare you keep something like that from me!
i had no choice.
nothing is changed.
no?
no.
father was right.
you looked stupid in that dress.
you can go now.
nothing has changed, that's what she kept telling him.
whatever plans they made, it's still on.
you're still convinced she's got the baby?
yeah.
then we're gonna have to let her go.
what choice do we have?
lock her up while it starves to death?
she's not stupid enough to have left it somewhere it could be heard crying.
why the hell i ever listen to you, hazel, i don't know.
the only chance we've got is to let her go, follow her, and hope to god she leads us to it.
you're free to go, miss fletcher.
on camera.
your target is crossing piccadilly gardens.
'piccadilly station.'
'following in.'
'dodger, cover front entrance.'
she's heading around the board.
'jimmy, move in ahead.'
she looks like she's heading for platform 10, 11 or 12.
no, she's heading for the escalator.
'jimmy, target behind me.'
'dodger joining.'
she's heading for the northbound metro link.
following.
she's aware.
following safe.
get me a map, will you?
'a vehicle.'
she's going upstairs.
'southbound.'
dodger, boarding the tram with her.
target is off tram, repeat, off tram.
'i'm with it.'
'there's a southbound tram pulling in.'
she's on the southbound train.
'she's alone on the southbound tram.'
'we'll chase by road.'
eccles tram leaving piccadilly now.
heads down, kiss the road.
'there is unit two.'
'unit one, heading for...'
here it comes.
target has alighted.
heading for exit.
'target heading out.'
get the bike.
'target is walking south towards the canal.'
'heading towards the station exit.
can anyone see her?
she's there.
pull in down here.
'she's starting to run.'
'she's running.'
'there is something in the bushes.
she's got something in the bushes.'
she's got the baby.
'unit one joining.'
'oh, my gosh!
she's thrown it in the canal.
all units, go, go, go!
she's in the canal!
the baby is in the canal!
it's a doll!
it's a bloody doll!
shit!
it's not the baby.
repeat, it's not the baby.
'i'm sorry, but we've lost her.'
'unit two...'
get a description out.
come on, people.
let's get her found.
ok, so what have we missed?
these aren't clues, they are just brian having his fun.
what if, seeing as this is all aimed at me, what if i speak to him?
but isn't that giving him exactly what he wants?
i don't care.
whatever it takes.
no.
i think eve should speak to him.
ah, eve.
i always knew you'd come.
how kind.
all this attention, brian.
i know.
the closest thing to love you'll ever feel, isn't it?
is that what's been so missing all your life?
how's jake?
fine.
how you can bear to let him even touch you?
i'm so sorry about all this press coverage, so very distressing.
i've always wondered why jake was your achilles heel.
he has something you never had.
he's genuinely sorry for what he did.
and you're jealous of him.
you want to be like him.
you want to feel what normal people feel.
hmm?
emotion?
humanity?
remorse?
guilt?
where is barbara?
she's not with you?
no.
well, well.
surely you must see by now that what happened to you wasn't her fault?
she had a baby at 12 by her own father.
such a godly man.
the only reason she did those things to you was in the mistaken belief that that is what you do to someone you adore.
no.
and now she's desperate enough to do anything to win you back.
isn't she?
that's all she's ever wanted all her life.
for her sake, brian.
where is she?
where's the baby?
will you please tell the nurse i'd like my bed bath.
now.
i'm not your sister, brian.
i don't run your errands.
is it warm enough?
do you like that?
i used to have a doggy.
you'd have liked my doggy.
yes.
he wouldn't eat anything out of a tin.
do you know what his favourite was?
chicken.
you'd have liked my doggy.
i'm gonna get you dressed.
then we're going on a trip to see your uncle.
mr and mrs armstrong are here.
that's josie's parents.
they want to see you, mr osbourne.
he said he's been to see you.
yes.
how is he?
how do you think?
i'm sorry.
said he recognised you from before,
you'd been to the university.
all i ever wanted was to see that he was... that he was...
was what?
that he was ok.
he's more than ok, thank you.
or he was until...
as i said, i'm really sorry.
will you be seeing him again?
i don't know.
if he would want to...
i hear he... lost his temper.
now, of course, he knows what you did, he's worried he's in some way like you.
no, no.
all i see is his mother.
let's hope that's what your mother says, too.
my mother?
she's had a stroke, she can hardly speak.
but she rang him up.
he's going to see her.
excuse me.
joss?
mary.
how nice to see you after all this time.
yeah.
parked up here.
i'm sorry you've been lied to.
yeah, well...
i've had so many press outside my door,
i've brought my own little home with me.
nice.
it is open.
all right.
sorry, it's a bit cramped inside.
oh, a baby.
argh!
at what time is josh meeting her?
about ten minutes ago.
all right.
do you want to give him a call?
there is no reply.
keep trying, mr armstrong.
joss armstrong is missing.
get his description out.
i want his phone records.
level one, threat to life.
he's still not answering.
just keep trying.
we think it might be worth you making a televised appeal.
how do you feel about that?
every address, no matter how tenuously linked to you, me, brian, his victims, they are all being covered.
sometimes all we can do is wait.
he helped me, brian.
when i was first inside,
i was in such a bad way.
and i was still...
and for whatever reason, he was the only one who... listened.
without brian i'd...
that's why me helping you, he feels so betrayed.
'you are watching gmtv.
the investigation into the disappearance of three-month-old baby
jake osbourne has been widened by police after the disappearance of joss armstrong.
he hasn't been seen since leaving his halls of residence last night.
police say the two incidents may be linked.
mr armstrong's adoptive parents made this appeal to anyone who may be holding their son.'
'even though he's grown up and at university...'
she's got a look of him, hasn't she?
she has, yeah.
no, didn't say nothing at all.
morning, boys.
could set the time by you, nigel.
what do you think of it?
as if?
ready for your close-up, mr demille?
oh.
can i see?
oh!
what the...
jesus!
go.
go, go.
he's out.
wicklow's out!
wicklow's out.
what?
how the hell did he get out?
he cut his own thumb off.
then he can't have got far.
not if he's hitch-hiking.
norton.
there's someone on the roof.
on the roof.
ajay, with me.
the rest of you, stay here.
is that barbara?
so, where's joss?
barbara?
barbara, please don't.
and where's brian?
she's left him somewhere.
she's left him for brian.
please.
please don't do that.
just...
just bring...
the baby to me, barbara.
move back from the edge.
there's a security lock-down on both wards.
he's a tiny baby, barbara.
he needs his mum.
think about your baby.
your little girl just... ..how much she meant to you.
oh.
come on, barbara.
come on.
give the baby to me.
sarah.
i called her sarah.
sarah.
that's a beautiful name.
come on now.
give the baby to me.
that's it.
no!
joss.
she what?
and the baby?
ok.
baby's ok.
oh, my god.
no!
don't move.
nobody move.
what have you done to him, brian?
he's just...relaxing.
you don't think i would...
well, not so soon, anyway.
i won't tell you again.
or i'll reach inside his chest and give his heart a little squeeze.
that sound familiar?
oh, dear.
i see he still hasn't told you what he did to that poor, poor man.
oh, it is good to see you again, jake.
brian, take me.
not joss, he's done...
what he did was true genius.
tell me, jake, was the plan to take his heart out or keep it beating just that little bit longer?
brian, let my son go.
people sometimes do monstrous things.
but it doesn't always make them evil, brian.
is that what you think i am?
oh, come on, eve, think.
surely you must know now more than ever.
i was not born this way, unlike...
that's why i was so fascinated by our dear friend here.
he was born...
i...was made.
that's what makes him far, far more dangerous.
i, for my sins, have a degree of predictability but dear jake has no idea when something will trigger him off.
isn't that so?
no.
swear on your son's life.
i thought not.
that's why...
don't...move.
that's why... if you ever leave him, he will kill you.
was barbara supposed to kill the baby?
your sister, yes.
she jumped, but she was on her own.
she couldn't go through with it, brian.
not even for you.
she knew what it was like to lose a baby and it hurt.
it hurt so much she couldn't even tell you, could she, brian?
let alone be parted from it for all these years so she wrapped it up in the very dress your father bought her.
because he
wait.
that - that - that's it.
brian, she wasn't 12 when she had the baby.
it was later.
when you were older.
that's why she couldn't tell you.
it was yours, brian.
your baby.
your daughter.
it was yours.
that's why she couldn't tell you.
it's all right.
say goodbye.
no!
# corinne bailey rae:
like a star
# just like a star across my sky
# just like an angel off the page
# you have appeared to my life
# feel like i'll never be the same
# just like a song in my heart
# just like oil on my hands
# honour to love you
# still i wonder why it is
# i don't argue like this
# with anyone but you
# we do it all the time
# blowing out my mind
# you've got this look i can't describe
# you make me feel i'm alive
# when everything else is au fait
# without a doubt you're on my side
# heaven has been away too long
# can't find the words to write this song... #
transcript:chocolate sync:innuit
__file_terminal__
♪ ole, ole, ole, ole... ♪
get in the car!
who are you?
i'm the man whose money you took.
he'll get done, sooner or later.
i made a call.
there's one thing nobody can escape from, it don't matter how big a master criminal you are.
the vat man.
well done on bringing us the money.
welcome to morocco.
help!
for your own sake, i suggest you answer these questions truthfully.
why are you on this boat?
that's... er...
that's all of us going on a fishing trip.
i remember that day... happy times.
you are putting a bag in the car.
what was it?
probably fishing gear.
bax?
quinn?
tell me about this, please.
where did you learn how to do this?
what is happening here?
that's... that's just lads on holiday, innit?
you know, things get a bit out of control.
hello?
who's there?
hello?
who are you?
where are my friends?
you all ok?
they... shaved me.
and they bust my new glasses.
where are we?
said morocco, didn't they?
yeah, i know that.
but where?
did they show you the pictures?
what pictures?
what do you say to 'em rick?
nothing.
obviously.
don't tell them anything, all right.
not until we get some kind of legal representation.
someone from the embassy - amnesty or someone.
how you gonna get in touch with them?
who are they anyway?
they're some kind of militia or something, aren't they?
they knew we had that money.
they picked us off.
they're probably using the money for some extremist movement.
so now we're funding terrorists.
oh, great.
this just gets better and better.
he was wearing a shirt, with a marks and spencer's label on.
i saw it sticking out.
who?
my interrogator.
i mean, extremists...
they don't shop at ms, do they?
they might.
shall we go and help him?
best not to get involved.
you all right, mate?
it's a woman.
serious.
it's a bird!
uh!
argh!
i was just trying to see if you were ok.
i'm quinn.
what sort of fag name is that?
dunno.
ask my dad.
named after my grandfather, i think.
i'm mercedes.
hi.
your dad into cars then?
heard of the count of monte cristo, dumb fuck?
yeah... no... yeah - fuck, i dunno, i can't remember.
um... uh...
can i just ask, what's with all the rough stuff?
it's what they do if you don't tell them what they want.
who are they?
a bunch of cocksuckers!
come on!
do you have any idea how we might get in touch with someone from the british government?
yeah, it's easy.
they're in there.
eh?
what?
it's the foreign office.
sorry.
what is this place exactly?
it's off the radar.
it's where they bring people to question... ..when they don't want anyone to know they're doing it.
oh, great.
a week ago, i was standing in line, holding a tuna baguette, queuing up for easyjet.
now i'm being fucking renditioned!
dear god, please help me see danger coming my way,
and forgive the body count i will be sending your way.
never pick up a dead man's gun.
i...
..heart...
..
bin laden.
right.
we should go en masse and demand to speak to whoever's in charge and make them understand they can't just keep us here.
there's laws and protocols...
you think they'll care about that?
they still have to abide by them.
says who?
woody, this is our government.
governments can't just hold us indefinitely for no reason.
what you on about?
course they can!
they do it all the time.
you remember those plane spotters in greece?
you remember that?
they said they were spies.
and what about guantanamo?
nobody even knew who was in there.
get off!
come on!
what?
it takes two of ya?
all right?
how did you end up here then, love?
i was in kabul, "love".
you in the army then?
no, i went there because i like the opera.
didn't like what i saw, so i went awol.
took a long fucking walk.
posted some things on the web.
things i thought people should see.
secrets?
there are no secrets.
only hidden truths.
nah.
just bitching about the food and the way they treat people.
now they think i'm bloody wikileaks.
dickheads.
how long do they usually keep people in here for?
as long as they want.
that's the point.
this place don't exist.
therefore, you don't exist.
what did you all do anyway?
fellas, can i... have a word?
in private.
this could be a trick.
she could be working for them.
you not seen her face?
they kicked her head in.
she's trying to scare us and then befriend us, you know.
get us to confess everything.
you got a point.
oi, wuss-bags.
just ignore her.
keep walking.
keep walking...
what, you not talking to me now?
i ain't the enemy.
anyway, if i wanted info out of you, i'd just....
..beat it out of you.
get off me, you lunatic woman!
ever had a cauliflower ear, quinn?
or a wet willy?
aaaaah!
you know what churchill said?
fuck off!
if you're going through hell, keep going".
tough it out, guys!
you can get through this.
you got each other for a start.
i'm the one all on her lonesome.
don't see me walking around with the clown's frown.
she's got a point you know.
we've really need to stay positive.
good idea, woody.
tell you what, why don't we see if they can organise basket weaving classes or something?
put our time to good use.
only trying to help, knobhead.
well, you're not.
saying "cheer up, it may never happen" doesn't cut it.
so, what, do you think it's somehow harder for you, quinn?
i don't think anything, bax.
because i'm stuck in an illegal prison in the middle of the sahara fucking desert.
and why am i here?
because you persuaded me that a weekend away would be "a laugh".
i persuaded you?
you called me.
i've never called you, baxter.
i've never called you because i cannot bear your incessant moaning and complaining.
oh, right, great - thanks.
that's nice.
great time to get that out in the open.
you told me you came because rick persuaded you.
yup.
here we go.
blame rick.
yeah, waiting for that one.
shove it up your arse, quinn.
you shove it up yours.
nice toughing it out guys.
oi, quinnbo, you know there's no "i" in team, don't you?
no.
but there's a "u" in "fuck you".
what's going on?
stop it!
get off!
get off me!
no, please, i haven't done anything.
please don't, please.
no...
woods...!
get your hands off him!
rick!
quinn!
stop it!
please...
baxter!
bax, please...
help!
get off!
what's happening?
please, don't.
let go!
where are you taking him?
leave him alone!
bax!
get your hands off him, you slags!
you bastards!
i watched the door all night to see if he'd come out.
yeah, me too.
shit, no...
come on.
let's not think the worst.
hiya.
i think there's more grub on the side.
just help yourself.
we've been worried sick.
you've been gone all night.
what happened?
i dunno... weird.
they asked me a bunch more questions and suddenly it was all, you know, tea and toast.
you should get some.
come, please.
oi!
is it all right if i bring my tea, chief?
sit.
fortunately for you... ..we're not actually interested in what you did over the last few days.
all we wanted to know was who you were financing.
we weren't financing anyone.
we were just trying to get home.
with five million euros?
we have at our disposal dna databases, forensic analysis, satellite imaging technology.
if that doesn't give us what we need, we employ enhanced interrogation techniques.
if we want to find out the truth, we do.
and now, we have.
we made a mistake.
it happens.
so...
you can go.
just sign these and we'll get you to the airport and on a flight.
hang on.
does that mean that we can...?
please don't ask if you can keep the money.
do you want us to do anything for you, back home?
little candle-lit vigil?
coloured rubber wrist bands - "free mercedes".
take care.
mrs peters. 101 bridge road, crawley.
it's my mum.
just let her know i'm all right.
don't mention this, eh?
you take care of yourself.
seriously?
did you really think we were going to get out of there?
two nights in.
nah... thought that was it.
what went through your mind?
well, first of all, my kids...
carmen, and then just like, stupid stuff, like...
i thought i'd never get to see united play again.
i kept thinking of my kids.
kept seeing their little faces.
then i thought about nina....
i started to think about all the things they'd find out about me, you know, when i was dead.
and what if they stopped loving me?
i wouldn't be there to tell them that that's not what i'm like.
be honest, kid, you were worried about her finding your porno collection.
nah, i don't know.
things that might be misinterpreted.
you know, e-mails, receipts.
yeah, i didn't think of that.
i wonder what people would really make of all this back home?
they might wonder why four grown men went on holiday together, saying they were going to spain and actually ending up in morocco.
if anyone so much as mentions "bad luck", they're walking.
be a long walk back, pal, we've been driving for nearly an hour.
haven't seen so much as a camel.
he's gone.
he's not coming back, is he?
two stay, two go and get help.
shouldn't we all go?
why?
or stay?
we'll double our chances if we split.
halve them you mean.
who wants to stay?
i do.
i'll go.
come on.
you two stay here, if the driver comes back, just all stay with the car, all right?
do you believe in destiny, bax?
no.
so shut up.
fate then?
rick, please.
no destiny, no fate, no karma, no spells, no curses.
this is just a series of misunderstandings, ok?
could have happened to anybody.
no more, no less.
who's...?
come on!
get in.
you are about to be shot, get in!
bax, get in.
woods!
quinn!
hey!
slow down, slow down.
we had some disturbing intel.
well, if it's bad news can you just lie to me?
i'd like to know what's going on, please.
a covert department of the cia, the special activities division has activated a kill contract on you.
sorry?
what are you talking about?
evidently, you've intersected a line of narco-finance and...
wait.
stop.
hang on.
all right.
now this might be because of the sun and this whole desert, shot at scenario thing but i'm just finding it a little hard to concentrate.
would you mind talking to me as if i'm five years old?
your man in majorca...
..has operated successfully for so long because he gives huge kickbacks to the american security services.
what?
he's paying the cia to protect him?
narco-finance is a major revenue stream
for american black ops.
like a five-year-old, please.
dirty tricks.
security activities they don't want people to know about.
drugs deals have been financing dodgy us foreign policy for years.
not really new news.
why would they want to kill us?
one of you tipped off the authorities in the uk.
a contact inside customs and excise.
your man here retaliated by telling the special activities division you were about to blow their op wide open.
so now they have to take you out.
no, this... this is crazy.
i mean...
why can't you just tell them, all right, that we're not the people that they think we are?
this goes higher than us.
this kind of thing brings down governments.
iran contra anyone?
which is why removing you is an easy piece of damage limitation.
they can't just shoot four blokes who just happened to go on holiday together.
under the aegis of "the global war on terror", they can shoot anyone they like.
and do.
that's who shot at us?
the cia?
no.
they'd have tasked local contractors.
so nothing can be linked back to them.
you got lucky...
but this isn't going to go away.
ok, let's get practical, then.
so what are the options?
well, there must be something?
right...
right - there may be a solution but we have to act now.
like, this minute.
your presence here is getting a little itchy for us.
excuse us for the inconvenience!
we may be able to get you out.
take you to another country.
new identities.
then what?
then i'm afraid you're on your own.
how long would this be for?
maybe for ever.
we can never go home?
it's the only offer on the table.
no, no, no, that's...
that's not an option.
no.
i'm going home and...
if you go back, you'll be putting your families at risk as well.
that is a guarantee.
ok, let me just see if this is even logistically possible.
stand up.
get up.
ok.
we can do it.
we have a scrambled phone link.
you can each of you make one phone call home but you must not, under any circumstances, tell them where you are and what is happening.
amy...
yeah, i know, i'm sorry that i haven't rung.
listen to me for a second, love.
nina...
just stop, just let me talk, darling, ok?
right...
there's no easy way of saying this, ok, so i'm just going to say it straight out.
i'm not coming back.
wait, wait, wait
i don't know who to phone.
well, i do, i want to speak to my kids, but i don't know which one to choose.
if i've only got one call, which one do i call?
you can't make me choose.
i need you to phone my folks,
i want you to tell them that i'm fine and everything's ok, that i'm just going to go travelling for a little bit.
rachel, are the girls with you?
where are they?
shit...
i want you to tell the girls that i love them both very much...
i don't know how long.
i know, i'm sorry.
just please, please...
don't let them think that i've abandoned them...
..because that is not what's happened.
i've met someone.
oh, amy...
please, just tell the kids, ok, that it's not because of them,
i'm sorry nina.
i'm really sorry.
dad, it's me.
yeah, no, i know, i thought i'd be back by now as well.
no, no, everything's fine.
it's just...
i think i'm going to stay out here a little longer.
what?
well, what happened to your satellite dish?
i can't hear you rachel, say that again.
take care?
er...
yeah, ok.
i will.
you too.
go back to the shop where you bought it from, right, and ask someone there to help you, they'll help you.
well, it's just because i don't know when i'm going to be back, dad.
fuck...
no, no, you're right, i'm sorry, i know i shouldn't swear.
dad, listen to me, ok?
you've been brilliant, dad.
yeah, just take care.
yeah...
i love you, dad.
take care.
bye-bye.
bye.
i know you all think it's my fault, don't you?
you think it's my fault because i phoned the vat man.
it's nobody's fault, rick.
it's just...
i don't know, the universe conspiring against us or something.
and has been since we set foot in alvo's villa.
a fly saved my life.
what?
out in the desert.
if it hadn't been for that fly, i'd have had my head blown off.
and the weird thing was, we'd met before.
we'd... ..bonded.
four hours now.
how far are we going?
any idea where we're going yet?
is that a don't know, or won't say?
bax?
what you going to call yourself?
what do you mean?
your name.
we can't use our own names right?
oh.
hey...
i'm gonna be floyd.
that's what i'm gonna call myself.
floyd...
floyd carter.
you can't call yourself that.
why?
it's a black name.
is it?
it's like calling yourself...
everton or tyrell, or something.
you can't.
needs to be something ordinary...
tony.
tony smith.
my name's tony...
smith.
why can't i be tony smith?
you call yourself whatever you like, mate.
sir tony smith if you want, mate.
we should call ourselves names that mean something.
you know, like the native americans do.
i'll be running scared.
i'll be...
mr dances with wolves.
no, i mean something...
something with hope in it.
you know, like...
if i was a girl, i'd call myself... ..well, hope.
you could be bob hope.
new hope.
new house.
aaron... no, adam.
adam newhouse.
james...
kirk.
jamie....
jamie kirk, then.
blake...
lin...
blake...
hee...
ha...
hatch.
blake hatch.
tony smith, adam newhouse, jamie kirk and... ..blake hatch.
hatch.
welcome to your new fucking lives.
where are we?
south africa.
we're on the other side of the world.
do they speak english here?
uh...
i think so.
what's it like?
i don't know.
this will all sort out, won't it?
eh?
a week from now, we'll be in a pub in london, we'll be laughing about this.
some rand to get you through the first few weeks.
a driving licence form and some other id stuff you'll need to fill in.
how do we get in touch with you?
you don't.
right, ok.
how do we keep in touch?
you won't be able to.
it's too dangerous.
hang on a minute.
what happens if it's safe for us, if it becomes safe for us to go home, to break cover?
how will we know that?
as far as anyone else knows now, you don't exist.
that's your best chance of surviving.
if you want to stay alive, stay invisible.
the truth will come out though, won't it?
in the end.
ok, let's go.
say your goodbyes.
come on, move this thing along.
come on, people.
this isn't a secure area.
take care of yourselves.
woody.
hey, we shouldn't be on our own.
listen, i know i said some things... ..but you boys mean a lot to me, all right?
and you always will.
quinn, quinn, come on.
guys, come on, we should stay together, yeah?
we're a team now.
we're a team, we're like a band of brothers.
rick, rick... all right, you'll be ok.
you'll be ok.
right, boys...
chin up.
at least we're still standing, eh?
you'll be all right, bax.
what makes you say that?
you're smart.
i'm not that fucking smart.
good luck.
hey.
what about if just me and him, we stick together?
it'll be all right, won't it?
no.
listen, nobody has to know.
it's for your own good.
you'll be all right.
i can't do this woody.
yes, you can.
no, i can't!
you're strong, mate.
you're stronger than you think.
no, i'm not.
i'm not, woods, i'm not strong.
i'm not strong at all.
woods, let's not do it, yeah?
you and me, we'll stay together, yeah?
woods...
woody...
woody, let me go with you, yeah?
please, woody.
woody, let me come with you, please.
hey!
you've got to be a man about it.
i've got to look after myself.
i'm not your fucking boyfriend.
woody...
woody, i don't want to be on my own!
woody, please.
woody!
woody, mate.
don't leave me, please.
woody!
please, mate, don't leave me here.
woody...
woody!
i know every disgraced politician, every gem smuggler, every high-stakes gambler and gold digger that come through those doors.
why you never go away?
you don't even leave cape town.
if you love her so much, why don't you marry her?
yeah, why don't you marry me and take me to england?
your name isn't newhouse is it?
how dare you, and how dare you try and blackmail me!
help!
__file_terminal__
last time on the hero:
game changed.
from now on, one of you will be eliminated.
what?
no one is safe.
i'm a huge target.
i'm not ready to go.
this is now survival mode for everybody.
and it was time to call the women out.
we've had four hero's challenges so far, all men.
when do the women step up?
step up.
or step out.
marty went to the hero's challenge and won.
but there was another twist.
i'll give you $30,000.
the only thing is, you got to eliminate yourself from the competition.
you can take the $60,000, bro.
now he must eliminate someone.
who will go home, and who will move one step closer to becoming the hero?
1x05
honesty
what up, bro?
yo!
look at you smiling all big!
you can't even keep it a secret in your face, man!
did you get it done?
yeah, i smoked it.
right now, i have great power.
i got to make sure that the decision i make
is good for me and is also good for the team.
this is crazy.
there's another twist.
and the hero's twist is that you can keep $30,000 for yourself,
but then you get eliminated if you keep the $30,000.
word?
i'm not gonna do that.
that's not me.
so, it's decision time, you know?
like, this is, like, no joke now.
it's d-day.
it's time.
somebody's going home.
i do feel like a target
for the simple fact that i took $50,000.
so, oh, man.
whew.
this was not an easy decision.
any of us could go.
it's kind of always risky
when you put the decision in someone else's hands.
all right, my choice is shaun.
i'm going home.
[bleep] off.
that's fine.
um...
it's expected and unexpected.
everything that he's been saying
and everything he's been doing, you know,
i feel like it was the right choice.
bottom line...
keep strong.
i made tough decisions
that other people weren't willing to make,
and i owned up to each and every thing that i did.
all right, everybody.
it was a calculated risk.
i took it.
it hurt, but it feels pretty right right now
when i'm leaving with $35,000.
i know.
believe me, it sucks.
how do you think ...
i had to do that.
i know.
shaun had my back
through a lot of stuff here at the house.
it's survival now, i guess.
i do want to stay until the end.
i know i don't have a chance getting voted in,
but you do, and i need you to...
kick ass.
and you do have a chance.
with shaun being gone,
maybe other people will want to get to know me.
and if i find one friend,
that's more than i have right now.
i know shaun's not here anymore, but i am.
thank you.
how you guys feeling
since shaun's out of the picture now?
three more people or something like that are gonna have to go.
it's kind of a reality of the game at this point.
you know, it's kind of funny ... everyone thinks 'cause shaun's gone, it's all gonna be good.
i got a feeling it's gonna get a little ugly.
yeah.
once the pressure starts coming on,
they're gonna turn against each other.
yo, guys!
we have clues!
what?
whoa, oh, oh!
oh, whoa, whoa.
here we go.
only six can go.
today's challenge ... the truth hurts.
what if it's a lie detector?
yeah, that's what i said ...
lle detector.
this is gonna be a mental challenge, not a physical one,
and it's gonna be one that could possibly cause division.
as usual, that's a great thing.
whoa!
$70,000.
hey, yo!
it's going up.
i have to be in the six.
the rock called all four of us women out,
so that killed me inside, you know?
i really have to go in this one.
i'm going in.
oh, no doubt about it.
i mean, we set.
you're going.
four girls?
i'm in.
i don't think any of us are gonna back down.
you know, i'll definitely be glad
to let someone else take this.
i sat, so i'm going.
that's four, plus me is five.
we need one more.
now the stakes are much higher.
you get in that hero's challenge and you don't win, you're out.
so, you're definitely putting yourself at risk
doing a team challenge.
i did the last team challenge.
i was just there.
i got a little sick from it, but i'm better now.
it's cool.
what do you want to do?
we're trying to figure out truths.
i think we need a cop, y'all.
charles, you're in, man.
good luck, you guys.
heroes, come on out!
oh, here we go.
you know, before this competition, if the rock showed up, i would be so excited.
but now when i see him, i'm like, "oh, man.
what's gonna happen now?
how you guys doing?
good.
welcome to stage one of this week's team challenge.
oh, sugar.
sitting in front of us is polygraph tests.
what are they going to ask me?
i have a lot of skeletons in my closet.
honesty.
doesn't always lead us down the easiest path,
and oftentimes, the truth can hurt.
but heroes shoulder that burden.
you six are gonna sit down,
and you're gonna get hooked up to a lie detector.
the other two are gonna sit over here,
and you're gonna ask them questions.
what?
somebody's clearly excited.
that said, this is mr. ornell,
a lie-detector specialist.
hold your applause.
there are seven questions.
mr. ornell will determine
whether you're telling the truth or not.
with every lie,
five minutes are gonna be shaved off the hero's challenge.
you're starting with 45 minutes,
so every lie will cost you valuable time.
we won't reveal who lied or who told the truth,
but you'll know.
so will america.
ooh, man, i've seen that machine
twice already to get on the police department.
i don't enjoy it at all.
i'd rather climb up the elevator shaft again.
i'm glad i'm not taking the polygraph test, 'cause i don't know what the hell they're gonna ask.
we need to be a unit, but now we're gonna be split apart.
everybody's already thinking about what's been said,
and i know everybody's been talking about everybody
because i've been talking about everybody.
all right, guys.
first question.
have you ever called patty the weakest link?
athena?
yes.
this challenge, man,
it's driven to get people to fight.
this could get bad.
i'm not gonna lie.
charles?
yes.
darnell?
i have no idea why i'm so nervous.
i don't think i've really lied to anybody on this show
since i've started this thing.
i've been shooting straight, as far as i'm concerned.
no.
lydia?
yes.
rachel?
no.
every second in these hero challenges counts.
word up!
0 minutes deducted from the hero's challenge.
when i said it, patty, i said it physically.
i am not the weakest link now, and i know that.
everybody else calling me the weakest link,
i think that's bull.
let it go.
there.
i'm actually pretty strong and pretty fierce.
i just do it in a different way.
i don't go, "beast!
next question.
it's gonna get ill here in a second.
yeah, it's gonna get gnarly.
have you ever called marty
immature, naive, or not smart?
patty?
yes.
athena?
yes.
charles?
yes.
i don't feel good about having to say something bad about someone,
especially when they're right next to you.
yes.
zero!
whoo!
bam!
i've never seen someone so happy
to be called not smart.
i don't really care.
bam!
you know?
zero lies!
duhhhhh.
marty's immature.
i'm immature.
hell, dave's 50, and he's immature.
all right, guys.
next question.
no.
darnell?
no.
how about you, lydia?
no.
rach?
no.
okay, "1 lie.
5 minutes deducted from the hero's challenge.
first lie.
did you ever say you felt like you were carrying athena in a challenge?
no.
okay, "1 lie.
5 minutes deducted from the hero's challenge.
here we go, you know?
it's starting already.
i know everyone's looking at me because of when we were in colã³n.
i never said i carried her.
go, go, go, go, go, go, go!
she actually told me.
i don't know if she believed it or not,
but she did say she carried athena.
no, no, wait.
she's swearing she didn't.
but i got to be honest.
i heard her say it.
america already saw who lied, so...
let's try to be honest.
you did say that.
you lying, slithering snake.
it's getting tougher.
did you tell a teammate you would not rat them out
if they took a temptation?
no.
yes.
we all have something we've done wrong.
we're not mother teresa here.
have you ever called a fellow cast member 'a snake in the grass'?
yes.
no.
yay!
zero.
we cleared the air, and it was something we all needed.
are you attracted to anyone else in the house?
yes.
look, i'm married, not blind.
nice!
whoo!
orgy tonight!
have you ever spoken disrespectfully
about a teammate's profession?
yes.
absolutely.
yes.
no.
one lie.
oh, man.
listen up.
listening up, copper.
you don't address me like that.
darnell, he throws out, "eh, you cop.
it was very antagonistic the way he said it.
that could have been on me.
that could have been ... my bad.
that could have been on me.
we're done.
good job, everybody.
good work.
cool, cool, cool.
only three can move on.
you have one hour to decide
and head to panama's bus graveyard.
this week's prize is $70,000.
i want to go.
from us six, we got to pick three,
and the women were chomping at the bits
to all be a part of that three.
i think as women, we could come together
and we could do a challenge.
i don't think there needs to be a guy in there.
i was pleading for an all-female team hoping that i would get to go in.
i'm good with that.
i'm good with that, too.
if you guys feel confident, go for it.
but there's only three open spots.
i would really like an opportunity, if it's fine with everybody.
you heard what i said, patty ... they asked if you were the weakest link,
and i said "no" ... it wasn't a lie.
i could potentially be the next one to go.
i need to go in today and i need to show you.
i need to.
i don't think your going in
is gonna save you or not save you.
and i personally feel because of your temptation,
we didn't get our opportunity.
i wanted to go to a hero's challenge.
i didn't get it.
that's a good point.
i'm okay with that.
lydia had a point for once.
i did do that.
point accepted.
so, it's set?
it's set.
lydia, patty, rachel.
yes!
we can't afford to take any chances
on this challenge not being successful,
because the hero challenge is do or die.
heroes!
the clue this week was "the truth hurts.
we started with the truth.
now comes the hurt.
no matter how tough you are, everyone has a breaking point.
i hear the word "graveyard,
and i think we're gonna be buried alive.
don't bury me alive.
you guys ready?
one person find the bus called 'abymelett.'
right, you want to take that one?
yeah, i'll get that one.
one person find the bus called 'elizana ismeral.'
i'll take that one. "aventura peligrosa." i'll take that one.
all right.
good luck.
all right, girls.
there are three buses
hidden in this massive bus graveyard.
they have 15 minutes to find them
and complete the task within.
fail, they lose 15 more minutes off the hero's challenge
and, of course, the money for the red cross.
so many buses.
i'm worried because you never know
what's going on in this competition,
like, what twist is taking place,
what temptation is being taken.
you know, i'm thinking the worst.
abymelett.
i'm willing to go 100% all the way
to prove that i'm a hero.
the rock called all four of us women out at the war room.
i need the rock to say to me, "you have my respect now.
abymelett!
i found it!
hello?
hello ... ohh.
hey, patty.
i cannot play with you anymore.
ugh! "put this gear on.
there are a quarter million bees on this bus.
i hate bees.
i have to walk to the back of the bus
just to get the tablets,
and there are eight numbers i have to retrieve
to complete a code.
all right.
doesn't the rock know i'm black?
black people don't do bees.
we see one bee, we run across the street.
my past taught me to fight for my survival.
don't sting me, please.
the earliest memories of when i was with my biological mother
are pretty vague.
i know that we weren't fed or clothed properly.
i know that we lived in a roach-infested house.
i know that she would leave us with strangers.
so, i have those survival skills in any situation.
2.
it's in my shirt.
it's in my face.
8.
oh.
oh, fudge.
challenge complete." rejoin your team.
if i have 300,000 bees, i have no idea
what rachel and patty have to deal with.
i feel like i'm running in circles.
it's started to mess with my mind ...
like, was i here?
because after a while, all the buses start looking the same.
all right, patty.
earlier today, i was talking about the truth, and the truth is, this is the most difficult offer.
okay.
all right?
so, right now, rachel is out there, and she's looking for a bus.
on that bus is
a big container of tear gas.
okay.
the offer is this.
$35,000.
if you take it,
rachel will get teargassed.
or you can not take the money, save rachel... but get teargassed yourself.
the catch is, whoever takes the tear gas
will have no shot at the hero's challenge.
i am not used to this.
being a mother from massachusetts,
the hardest decisions i make are
whether to put chicken or beef on the table tonight.
if i'm ever going to take a temptation, it's gonna be this one.
we need money like everybody else.
all right, patty.
before you make the decision,
i have someone who wants to talk to you.
how are you?
i love you.
i miss you so bad, babe.
hey, no crying.
i know.
how are the kids?
are they there?
they're right here, yeah.
alex, i'm here with the rock, dude.
just say, "hi, alex.
what's up, alex?
hey.
how you doing, man?
good.
how are you?
you'd be so proud of your mom, man.
she is conquering her fears, and she is doing an amazing job.
and you should be proud of her.
yeah, i'm very proud of her.
i know what that must have meant to alex.
the rock, his idol, told him to be proud of his mother.
babe, i'm trying to act like a hero here, okay?
i know that.
you are.
so, right now, i have an offer that i can have a teammate teargassed
for $35,000.
dude.
or i can lose the money and take the tear gas myself.
oh, yikes.
um...
babe, i keep passing up on the money.
i'm sorry, okay.
i just have to play this the honest way, the best way i can, okay?
so [bleep] it.
i'll get another job, right?
exactly.
i got to go out with my head held high, so i can't let somebody get hurt.
so, i love you.
we love you, too, and you are our hero, babe.
we love you.
i don't think he's ever said something like that to me.
i probably never gave him a reason to say something like that to me.
i'm in a bus with the rock, though, and i've been lonely, hon.
i'm gonna go get teargassed now, kids.
i love you.
i get to my bus.
what's up, rach?
how you doing?
what's going on?
but why is patty standing here with the rock?
inside this bus...
mm-hmm.
...is a big container of tear gas.
earlier, i offered patty $35,000.
if she took it, well, you'd get tear gas.
or she could save you and not take the money and take the tear gas herself.
the catch is whoever gets teargassed has no shot at going on to the hero's challenge.
tell rachel what your decision was.
i chose to take the tear gas so you don't have to.
patty...
it sucks.
it makes her look good.
...you didn't have to do that.
i know.
another thing is, you know,
i'm not sure if she could do the hero challenge, so maybe she saved herself that way.
all right, you have 1:43 left to successfully complete the team challenge.
in the bus is a tablet.
you're gonna retrieve a code.
you've got a minute of being inside that bus while getting teargassed.
at the end of that,
there's another tablet on the side of this bus,
and i want you to enter the code in that tablet.
i'm thinking i won't be able to remember the numbers.
i mean, i'm freakin' scared out of my mind.
i talked about finding your mana.
o'niels never quit.
right.
when he said o'niels are not quitters, i know i have to do it.
that's been our slogan since the kids were little.
find your mana, patty.
7-2-4-5-2.
7-2-4... 10 more seconds, patty!
i need you to hang in there!
okay!
minute's up!
let's go!
patty, all you got to do is enter the code to stop the clock.
patty, you still got to hit "enter!
come on, you can do it.
what?
i'm glad i didn't have to go through that...
but i would have.
and i would not have been mad at her about it at all.
congratulations, ladies.
you did it.
$15,000 for red cross.
these molecules from tear gas are like barbs,
so they're all over your body.
i won't hug you.
you're not supposed to hug.
come on.
but, god damn, come here.
oh, shut the front door!
i'm proud of you.
that was the best hug i ever got.
so, tomorrow, lydia, rachel,
you're the only ones eligible for the hero's challenge.
all right.
you guys get back to the penthouse.
i found my mana.
you found your mana.
thank you.
o'niels never quit.
what up?
what up?
ohh!
what up, moo kitty?
what it is!
did you beast it?
coming home, i'm elated.
i'm not the weakest link anymore around here.
i don't think so at all.
so, i chose to not have rachel teargassed.
i took it myself.
boom!
i don't get any money, but i'm also
not allowed to be in the hero challenge.
what?
this makes me think a lot different about patty.
i mean, i knew she was an honest, good person,
but that's pretty heroic, i got to tell you.
who's thinking right now hero challenge?
lydia's wanted this for a long time.
so have you, so you get to voice.
don't give up your mana moment.
if i go to the hero's challenge and i win,
i have the power to eliminate somebody.
i have to eradicate the house of the cancers.
the people that deserve to be here should be here.
but the hero money is getting large.
it's a tough decision to turn down
a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity of guaranteed money
when it's presented to you.
i stepped down today because lydia did make a good point,
but, like, now it's like, okay,
i let someone go who's gonna send me home.
if she wins.
that's true.
i don't feel that good.
i went to my room,
and for sure, things started to get really dizzy.
i'm sweating, and i need some help.
patty, what's wrong?
i'm really not feeling good.
i'm feeling really dizzy.
well, this is a bad position.
let's just get you to lay on your back.
yo, are you all right?
yeah, she got ...
she just got a little dizzy.
she's not doing good at all.
i don't want to throw up, but i feel like i'm gonna puke.
like, her eyes are rolled back in head.
she's sweating profusely.
okay.
probably dry heaves.
it's okay.
it's from the stupid tear gas.
i would say this could have been the toughest challenge.
to see her down like that and in that much pain and there's nothing i can do ... that sucks.
it really does.
just lay down.
lay down.
hey, guys.
i'm a doctor, too.
she was exposed to tear gas today about maybe an hour and a half ago.
and her pulse is good.
the pressure's good.
it's just bad nausea.
i think maybe phenergan or zofran and some i.v. fluid would be good.
you never want to see anyone like that, especially someone like patty, you know, who's such a good person.
i want to be the hero.
i really do.
but i don't know if i have what it takes to be in this competition.
next time, take the money.
waking up this morning, i definitely feel better.
god, dr. dave ... so awesome.
i think he exemplified what a hero should be.
i keep getting faced with, do i vote my friend in or do i play strategically and vote her in and hope she loses?
are you nervous?
not going in, but when you come back to eliminate?
no.
i'm already in my fight mode.
i know that feeling of wanting to be somewhere and working hard and the rejection.
like, it's the worst feeling in the world.
i don't want to make eye contact with anybody.
i just want to stay focused
and get my mind ready for this fight.
but it has to be done.
wow.
i talked to you guys last week about stepping up.
you stepped up.
you rose to the occasion.
i'm very, very proud of you, and you feel it.
a few weeks away, america's gonna be voting.
right now, the pot's at $360,000
and growing very quickly.
there can only be one
who's gonna go home with all that money.
that said, let's chat.
patty, you took the tear gas.
i did.
why?
i said i wouldn't take a temptation
to everybody here, so i didn't do it.
and i wasn't sending
somebody else in to take tear gas.
you don't send somebody else in to take the pain
if you have to take the pain.
word up.
that's nasty.
i'm nasty.
i've never been nasty.
i talked about stepping up, and you stepped up.
you all stepped up.
athena, do you think at this point
that there is a target on your back?
yes.
absolutely.
how do you get rid of it?
i think it's too late to do that.
and i wish it wasn't, and i've seen a lot of football games
where you come back in the last 30 seconds,
and you win it.
but the target's there.
if i go home, i go home.
okay.
well, the floor is yours, rachel.
let this be my opportunity.
don't let me have to say
i never made it in that hero's challenge.
because i want this.
my child is all i have, and he's everything to me.
i would do anything for my son.
and that's why i'm here.
i'm here for him.
i'm here to prove to him that
no matter what you're faced with in life,
no matter what challenges,
just go and take that opportunity and do it.
and my son is gonna say, "she kicked ass.
he'd be proud of you.
thank you.
lydia?
i don't want to cry.
it's all right.
i don't want to cry because i'm not scared.
i have no fear.
i'm not scared of being eliminated,
but i want this so bad.
everybody sits here and they talk about
their loved ones, their families,
and they fight for them.
i fight for me.
i have no one waiting for me at the airport.
i do this for me.
my entire life, i've had trials and tribulations.
and i don't just survive, i fight.
when i came into this competition, i came here to fight.
if i can get through this,
there is no limitations in my life ... not one.
there's a good chance that i could be eliminated,
and then i realized i'm not here for the money.
we all need money.
i'm here for me.
and i'm gonna kill this, and i'm gonna die trying.
i'm ready.
damn, you guys make it hard.
ahh!
you five know the drill.
got some strong individuals up there.
time to vote.
all right, five.
you know the drill.
this ain't gonna be easy this week.
these are some strong individuals.
time to vote.
okay.
this week's hero is...
oh!
thank you!
i'm not gonna let you guys down, and i'm gonna come back a winner.
i can't wait.
it's your moment, babe.
can't wait.
all right, lydia.
i'll see you at rebus ridge, and i'll have a new offer for you.
if you win this challenge, you'll have the opportunity to tap out and take $70,000.
if you win it.
it's time to bring it.
lydia, it's rock.
you got me in your ear?
copy.
for this challenge, you must scale rebus ridge in search of images that are hidden in various rock formations and form a common phrase.
bring the images to me and decipher the phrase.
you'll have three guesses.
and your only tools are gonna be your backpack and the tablet you've been given.
i hear you.
you would have had 45 minutes, but because of the two lies, you now have 35 minutes to complete this hero's challenge.
i know for the team i'm gonna be there 100%.
but when it comes to that actual money, like,
you eliminate yourself from the competition if you take that money.
it's gonna be kind of a tough decision, to be honest.
i know the terrain is tough out there.
just stay focused, use that fighting spirit, and bring it home.
copy that.
inside these rocks are a piece of the puzzle.
it's got a chain connected to it, and at the end of the chain is this big-ass round-shaped boulder.
okay.
i'm gonna take a picture.
all right.
i got the first one.
i may have these guns,
but i also have brains.
i can't believe the rock thinks that
i'm about to put this in this backpack ... that's stupid.
i'm not gonna try to carry stone to stone to stone.
he just asked for the image,
so i'll just take a picture of the image.
my entire motivation for completing this challenge was to prove to myself that i could do anything i put my mind to.
i may fall.
i may get cut up.
but i'm gonna get back up and i'm gonna keep trying.
a man row ... a man ... whoa!
whoa!
okay.
it's kind of steep.
all right.
i hope i don't trip.
i can barely walk around,
and the wind is blowing me all kinds of crazy ways.
i'm scared that i might break my ankle.
a man row is ...
a hero is!
a hero.
he... a hero is.
lydia, you got 10 minutes to go.
a hero is!
10 minutes.
you know, a hero isn't just about
integrity, courage, strength,
flexing eyebrows like this,
or having abs like mine.
i mean, sure, it looks good.
but without a brain, a hero will go nowhere.
come on, lydia, you've got 8 minutes, 45 seconds left.
i was orphaned at the age of 3.
shit happens to good people every day all across the world.
and you can use that as a crutch to take the easy way out,
or you can use that to fuel your drive.
a hero is born.
[bleep]
a hero is born a noose ...
a knot, a rope.
there you go, lydia.
you're on your way.
you got one more to go.
one more clue.
i hear you.
it felt great to have the rock rooting me on.
it was awesome.
[bleep]
okay.
a hero is serving...
rope.
maid.
a hero is...
you're figuring it out ... just stay focused
and bring it home.
i don't know how much time i have at this point,
but i know i can't afford to waste time,
so i'm like, "i got to hustle.
a hero is made.
incorrect.
a hero is not made.
incorrect.
lydia, you got one more shot.
i got two wrong already.
and i know i only got three tries.
if i get this wrong, i'm off the show.
i cannot afford to not get this right.
damn it!
lydia, you got one more shot.
i got two wrong already.
and i know i only got three tries.
if i don't get this right, i'm off the show.
a hero is born, not made.
a hero is born, not made!
time?
i made it?
how epic do you feel?
yay!
whoooo!
whoo!
aah!
congratulations.
thank you.
you're welcome.
lydia, here's your $70,000.
can i look at it?
you can look at it.
yeah, absolutely.
it's your money.
whoa!
my ultimate goal is to start a huge orphanage where all the kids would always have a home.
with this money, all of my dreams could come true.
the choice is yours ... you could either take the $70,000, put it in the big pot, make it $430,000,
but it means you must go back to the house and eliminate someone.
or right here, right now, you can take the money, but it means or rigyour journey ends now.
it feels good to hear that you have $70,000.
no, my journey doesn't end until america says it ends.
put it in the pot.
i imagined that i was taking it home for, like, a minute.
okay, so you're putting the $70,000 back into the pot,
$430,000.
that also means that you have to eliminate somebody.
who's it gonna be?
i feel like shit.
really?
i just ...
i just hurt.
i'm praying to god that lydia doesn't walk through the door.
if she doesn't come home, that means i'm not going home
and i can stay a little bit longer.
coming home is bittersweet.
ohh!
you come off this adrenaline high
completing an epic challenge,
but then you know you have to tell someone to leave.
good job, girl.
so, you beat it up!
lydia could easily eliminate me.
i won a hero's challenge,
so she might think i'm her biggest competition.
it was exciting, it was thrilling,
and to hear the rock say, "i'm proud of you,
that means something.
and then he said, "but you have to eliminate somebody,
and you have to tell me now." ooh.
in the back of my head, i'm like, "she's sending me.
and i was just thinking "what is the definition of a hero?
it's all right.
our arguments are fresh in her head,
and she's taking me out.
and i wanted to do the right thing,
because i wanted to be fair.
and i'm thinking about, you know, a hero.
my definition ... honesty, number one, integrity.
and without those things, you can't trust people.
you just can't.
and people, yeah, they make mistakes.
and if they can woman up or man up to admitting them,
then they can grow.
and i was thinking, like,
i'd rather have a snake
come straight in my face and bite me
than be that snake that's behind me
and take me out.
athena, at the end of the day, you took the temptation,
but you never lied about it.
you did tell us, and i respect you for that.
so, i had to make a decision, and it's not an easy decision
because i respect each and every one of you
in this room right now,
the journey that we've been in.
i had to choose you, rachel.
whoa.
what?
no.
i'm sorry.
you have to leave the condo now.
oh, no.
no.
dang.
damn!
that's ... that's the double-edged sword
of this damn game.
[bleep] i hate this game so much.
sometimes a hero's got to make tough decisions.
that was one of them.
great job.
thank you.
when she lied during our last challenge,
i felt that was very selfish.
honesty is everything.
you cannot trust a liar.
she is a [bleep] fake-ass bitch.
and that's nothing but malicious behavior.
and that is not heroic.
i'm sorry.
i haven't done [bleep] to her.
just makes me sick.
i know deep down inside the type of person she is because i dealt with chicks like that my whole life.
they manipulate people to get what they want and try to do things to make themselves look good by putting others down.
and that's what she's doing today.
she's sending my ass home so i can't sit in this house and look better than her anymore.
can i get a "hero"?
'cause i know i'm still a mother[bleep] hero, right?
1, 2, 3, hero!
guys, kick ass and take names, all right?
yeah.
mwah!
the biggest thing that i got of this entire experience is to just keep being me.
and i'm not going to change who i am.
i'm a great teacher.
i'm a great mother.
and i will find my warrior mana.
i will.
__file_terminal__
previously:
nine contestants have come to panama... to see if they have what it takes to be a hero.
you got to be kidding me.
but only one will win your vote, america a prize currently worth $300,000 and still growing.
holla!
last week, i made an offer athena couldn't resist.
did you get an offer?
i took it.
i don't feel bad about it.
and it tore the team apart.
listen to me!
you're a snake.
shut up!
i'm not gonna shut my mother[bleep] mouth.
because you're weak.
stop.
none of you were heroic last night ... none of you.
then, in the hero's challenge...
this is nuts!
...darnell was given a shot at redemption and won $50,000.
yeah!
baby, i'm taking that money.
will the team understand his actions?
some people are gonna be like, "well, heroes don't take money.
i can't control that.
all i can do is worry about the things i can control.
find out right now on "the hero.
1x04
heart
yes!
he's home!
bro!
i guess darnell's here.
really?
i get back to the house, and it was hard for me to keep the smile off my face.
you got it.
you can tell by your face.
you know i got it.
that's awesome!
congratulations!
whoo!
i'm nervous because i'm gonna have to tell people,
look, i'm going home with 50 grand!
i took the money.
yeah, good for you.
you deserve it.
that's fine.
a good guy wins, and i'm okay with that.
you know, that's gonna help his family.
my family was on the phone when i got done.
i don't agree with what he did to the team.
this is just stupid.
if america sees that you're pocketing that 50 "g,
i don't think they're going to vote for you to be the hero.
finally!
whoo!
i was just really happy.
like i said, nothing wrong with taking the money.
and most likely, people would take the money, especially since it's not affecting the whole group.
darnell comes back, and everybody was happy that he won, but you were still hearing people taking shots.
finally the good guy won.
so it was pretty clear that athena and i are the perceived bad guys.
heroes!
hello.
bring it in.
what?
ohh!
rock just walked in.
when you see him at the house, something's going down.
from now on, the hero's challenge will go up to $60,000.
wow.
you just missed it by one, darnell.
damn!
but also, with great reward comes great risk.
and right now, i'm raising the stakes.
from now on, every week, one of you will be eliminated.
what?
word?
whoever goes on to the hero's challenge,
if you fail, pack your bags, 'cause you're going home.
now, if you win the hero's challenge,
you alone will be responsible
for sending whoever you want home.
jesus.
these eliminations are not designed
just to whittle the heroes down.
they're also a test to see when these heroes' backs
are against the wall, what do they choose to do?
now i want you to think about
the six who you're gonna choose to compete.
i need that decision tonight.
what?
'cause starting tomorrow,
i'm gonna find out who the real heroes are.
i am definitely concerned
that i'll be eliminated from america's vote
and leave with nothing.
we have to decide tonight.
i'm kind of excited to see what happens.
it's gonna change the game.
someone's going home, whether it's me or someone else.
does anyone here want to go home?
i know that might be a stupid question.
absolutely not.
no way.
i kept the money for my family, so i'm a huge target.
i'm glad i got into mine before this game changed.
i'm still public enemy number one.
i know.
if i get an offer, i almost have to [bleep]
whoever are going to the hero challenge.
this is no longer a game about fairness
and everybody should get a chance and whatnot.
no, this is now a game about survival.
so if i'm offered another temptation again, do i take it?
you stuck up for me, and that was really cool.
yeah.
i've never had a man take care of me ever.
it's just really cool for you to be there for me.
you don't know me.
so, what you doing later?
wait, wait, wait, wait.
there's a clue.
jump, endurance, swim.
i'm not a strong swimmer,
but i've learned in this house, fake it till you make it.
we got to find out, obviously, who has good endurance
and who can swim like a champion.
i've got endless endurance.
i wrestle for 45 minutes.
i dance for four hours.
also, we have to think big picture.
whoever of the six can do this hero's challenge,
they have the power
to either kick someone off or be kicked off.
that's crazy.
i really think there's a bull's-eye on my back
because they keep looking at me like i'm weak.
and this whole time, i've been passing up money.
maybe that's the mistake.
because now i could go out of here
without anything.
who feels confident that they could do good in this?
right now, i'm just real achy, but i'm ... pssh, deal with it.
i think this would be a good team, you know ...
me, athena, rachel, shaun, and charles, and dave.
i suggest athena and that big mamaluke shaun
so that they can't screw whoever gets in the hero's challenge.
if you are successful,
you will have double the time for the hero's challenge.
and $15,000 will be given to the american red cross.
nice.
at sunrise, head to san sebastian barrio.
wow.
what is a barrio?
two of you search for the barrio...
for a code you could find in napo's house.
four of you get to punta pacifica.
punta pacifica means pacific point.
so it sounds to me like pacific point
would be more likely to be the swimming portion.
so i'll do napo's house.
i'll take pacifica.
running is not my forte.
everyone thinks it's gonna be a swim challenge.
marty and dave, good swimmers.
rachel's a good swimmer, but we don't know
if we should let shaun and athena go together.
i'd like to go to pacifica, too.
we need someone that speaks spanish to come with us.
i speak spanish.
all right.
i'll go with you.
all right.
marty's strength is swimming.
let's go to the beach.
you and me, we'll head to the water.
whatever you guys want.
all right, well, then the two of us will go for napo's house?
i'm thinking they're not gonna send shaun and i together.
why would they send us off alone?
are they stupid?
and all of a sudden...
you guys go to napo's house,
and we'll go to punta pacifica.
all right.
so, kind of by default, shaun and athena get paired up.
and immediately, dave and i look at each other.
he's like, "you think this is a good idea?" i'm like, "no.
a lot can happen when these two are together.
but you know what?
maybe it's a chance for redemption.
hero!
i have no idea where we're going.
there's two stages to every challenge,
and we have 30 minutes to do both the first and second part.
do you want to ask someone right away?
yeah, probably should.
inglés?
ihola!
shaun speaks spanish.
who knew that shaun spoke spanish?
right here, right here.
napo?
god, i hope this is the right house.
i don't want to walk in and find some old men
walking around naked taking showers.
ihola!
running out of the barrio, and we see punta pacifica.
it looks like a hospital.
tell it.
all right. "take the stairs to the 32nd floor.
get on top of the sky bridge and await the code.
let's go!
32nd floor!
wow, i just feel punked.
i thought i was getting in some water right now, but no.
we're running up steps.
go!
pace it.
too fast!
pace it!
pace!
too fast!
you got to get it.
charles helped my ass up those steps when i was blacking out.
he didn't have to do that.
this is hard.
as a single parent,
i don't trust people because of what i've been through in life,
but he was there to keep me going.
so that's a hero, in my book.
ihola!
napo?
it seems pretty certain we found the right place, but i don't see anybody and nobody's responding.
ihola, napo?
anybody here?
oh, my god!
ihola, napo?
are you napo?
is that your code name?
you found napo's house.
here it is.
they randomly picked shaun and i to go into the barrio, and we ran right into their worst nightmare.
i got an offer for you ... $30,000 to split between the two of you.
if you take the $30,000, you're gonna make the hero's challenge twice as hard.
i'm gonna remind you guys about something.
the hero's challenge, if they fail, they're going home and they're getting eliminated.
if they succeed, they're gonna have the power
to eliminate whoever they want, possibly one of you two.
what if one of us takes it and the other one doesn't?
you can't do it.
this offer's all about survival.
i've got to take out whomever is going into the hero's challenge,
because i need to make sure
that they've got less of a chance to come back
and send me home.
so that way, i can send them home.
you guys go outside, talk about it,
come back in here and let me know.
let's talk.
all right.
a hard choice must now be made,
but heroes and hard choices often go hand-in-hand.
in many ways, this is the ultimate temptation.
what would you do, america?
[bleep] no.
charlie and i do what good teammates do.
we helped her all the way up.
but i was like, "where the hell's marty?
i wish he was down here helping us.
i get to the top, and i have no idea what's going on.
it's so easy.
come on, babe.
here we go. 32nd floor.
we got six more, and that's it.
six more.
here we go.
come on, babe.
we made it!
we made it.
get down.
oh, no!
no!
lay her down.
lay her down here.
baby.
watch her legs.
straighten out.
talk to me.
just let her breathe.
[bleep] what happened?
she passed out.
you did great, sweetie.
rachel, she looks out.
i'm so sick, guys.
i'm sorry.
this might be bad.
if we don't complete this challenge,
the hero's challenge's time is gonna be cut in half
and whoever's on that, could be me,
could potentially be going home.
guys, i couldn't have done it without you.
all right.
here we go.
help her up.
help her up, guys.
not too fast.
me being a doctor, i know what's going on.
she needs fluid, but she's got to do this challenge.
and, she's ... there's no quit in rachel.
the rock offered athena and i $30,000 to split.
the one thing we haven't had this entire time is power.
you and i, right now, think about this.
are you gonna go to the hero's challenge?
no.
no way.
the game's different now.
it's not a matter of fair, fair, fair.
i mean, look, charles leveled with me today.
he told me.
he said he doesn't know.
and i know what that means.
that means that if he gets in, i'm going.
even if they lose the challenge, they go home, we're safe,
we're on the chopping block next week.
that's fine.
we're done.
but that's fine.
we've survived.
no.
we've survived, and we're taking money home.
no, you're nuts.
why is that nuts?
nobody's gonna know.
who would know?
you have no heart, bro.
no heart?
after five people ganged up on you
and i stood there and defended you to the hilt.
i'm struggling with, "do i take it
and save my best friend on the show,
or do i not take it
because america's gonna think that's wrong?
it's a big mess.
ohh, man.
when i saw harness and i saw helmet,
i knew that this had to do with jumping off something very high.
i'm just hoping my body doesn't fall apart.
got it, bro?
all right, you can go.
we're standing on this creaky bridge
going across two buildings.
i'm like, "holy shit," you know?
like, this place is nuts.
enter code." we need a code.
we need their code.
where are those guys?
we can't see shaun and athena.
there's definitely concern that maybe things have been offered.
where are those guys?
you see them anywhere?
all right, guys.
take me through it.
what's on your mind?
if we don't take it, shaun is going home.
he's my best friend here.
if we take it, i'm going against my word.
i got nothing.
i don't know.
shaun?
the game has changed now at this point.
i could give a [bleep] about the money.
at this point, it's a matter of survival.
i want to come back and fight another day.
i think there's a good shot that i can get america's vote.
i can't do it.
i can't take it.
i can't.
i'm sorry.
i'm so sorry.
i instantly felt bad.
shaun's my friend.
i've stuck up for him.
he's stuck up for me.
but not taking this temptation
is a way of redeeming myself, i guess.
well, here's what i need you guys to do.
go to the oceania towers, 14th floor.
relay this code to the team who's on the sky bridge.
the code is 1-9-2-0.
thanks.
all right.
thank you.
appreciate it.
yeah, man.
unless i get myself in the hero's challenge,
i can't see any possible way
that i am not going home or that athena's not going home.
punta pacifica.
it's a hospital.
where are those guys?
we need them.
where are those guys?
oceania is on the signs over there.
yeah.
you see 'em?
we're down here!
there they are!
what's the code?
1-9-2-0!
1-9-2-0.
1-9-2-0. 1-9-2-0.
yes.
oh, all right.
i see.
so, that bag right there, we have to retrieve that.
yeah.
i'm a little on the nervous side for the fact that i have the flu
and it is ridiculously high.
i don't know if i can do it.
i'm a little on the nervous side.
i had this left in me.
but i have to suck it up and get that bag by myself 'cause i cannot run 32 stories again.
oh, my god.
yes!
yeah!
everything that was going through my mind, that all just went out the window.
i just felt like wonder woman.
yeah!
what's really at stake here is we got to get through the team challenge to help the solo challenge.
if someone fails the hero's challenge, they're done.
this could potentially affect me.
i don't know.
come on, dr. dave!
god dang it!
come on, wind.
stop.
dave being a little height-challenged, you know,
i think he's a little nervous right now.
stop.
just reach out.
just jump.
it sucks to be the shortest one on the team 'cause, you know, that bag's way up there.
i don't want to blow it and look like a chump.
yeah!
short men can jump!
yes!
all you guys killed it!
i'm like, "oh, great.
if i miss, man ... if i miss, it's like
so, what did you guys do?
well, we went through the barrio, we got to napo's.
okay.
and, well, there was no napo, but we found the rock.
he gave us an offer.
she said she gave her word, and so we didn't take the money.
maybe they drank a big cup of jesus
and decided that it was not good to do that
or they're lying to everybody.
you didn't take it, for real?
we didn't take it.
come here.
give me a hug.
they turned it down.
i think they're now trying to stay in the game,
so they need to prove themselves to us.
there was a little bit of redemption.
all right.
heroes, heroes, great job.
great job.
all right.
it's gut-check time, time to make a decision.
three of you guys are gonna move on.
three of you guys are gonna go back to the penthouse.
those of you who are moving on,
go up to the 32nd floor inside the elevator shaft.
you've got five minutes to decide.
climbing.
bring it!
i want to go, but i've been in the last two,
and i said i'd back you.
so, if you're healthy, you got my vote.
considering that stair climb and your health today,
it's your call, but i don't think it's the best choice.
i'm not gonna lie.
this flu is kicking my ass.
i don't want any two people
trying to pull me through something because i'm sick.
i want three strong people to go on that challenge
that are gonna kill it.
i want to go.
i think i stepped down for you guys last time.
yeah.
i'd like to go.
i would love to go.
you know, i did the same.
i absolutely want to go.
shaun brought it today.
he turned down a temptation,
so he definitely gained some of my respect back.
my initial thought was the three of us.
i agree.
i think that's good, also.
if you get in the hero's challenge and you lose,
then you're gone.
that's a complete game changer.
when i did that climb up the stairs, you know,
i did have a lot of burning from my throat all the way down.
shaun, man, i'm not 100%.
i'm gonna let you go.
okay.
i appreciate it.
do it, man.
okay.
let's go, guys.
let's go.
do this!
good luck!
later!
tell it.
right here.
all right.
let's see what we got.
do it.
oh, yeah!
this is pretty scary, man.
i mean, you're standing at the edge,
and you're looking down 30-something floors to nothing.
but that fear drives me
to just kill anything that comes in my way.
i think in a way,
i'm trying to redeem myself in the eyes of my teammates.
i know i've got a really good chance that if i'm not going
to the hero's challenge, i'm going home.
who the hell wants to take a shitty elevator
when you can go up like this?
hell yeah.
beast!
let's do it!
gentlemen, gentlemen, gentlemen!
what's happening?
let's go!
what time is it?
game time!
what time is it?
game time!
there you go!
let's go, boys!
let's go!
i was a little slow to start.
it was just getting me.
these guys started blazing.
i'm just like, "great, now i'm hanging out in back here.
come on, shaun.
let's go, shaun!
come on, shaun.
come on, buddy!
shaun is all the way at the bottom right now.
if we do bad on this part,
the hero's challenge is gonna be a lot harder,
and whoever's doing it is potentially gonna go home.
wait for shaun.
he might be trying to make it harder on purpose.
so we really, really go to be careful.
you're over halfway.
there you go!
this show's called "the hero"!
this is a rock show!
don't make me look bad!
go strong, or go home.
and believe me, i [bleep] mean that.
it's either go strong or go home.
america's watching.
four floors to go.
the reason that i even ended up being a wrestler
is after watching the rock.
rock is the man.
so, when you got the rock yelling at you,
that's a huge push.
thataboy, shaun!
get it!
i'm right here with you.
come on, boys.
come on!
one more floor!
come on.
leave everything you got in this elevator shaft!
you're doing it!
yeah, boys!
fortunately, i come out on top.
you've got this.
nice!
great job!
it makes it much less likely
that i might possibly go home now.
charles, you got this.
you own this.
i'm on this.
you're so close.
i'm coming to you, charles.
drop me down.
drop it.
come on, man.
come on.
i got it.
my body's just, like, spent.
everything's shaking.
i can't even hold the ropes anymore.
center yourself, and just think about it.
i hope he finishes, man, 'cause that would suck.
take a moment.
focus.
you've got this, charles.
charles was so tired that he can't even do it anymore.
he's not even really moving right now.
one more floor!
i've been here many times.
it's just my job.
serving a warrant, you know, zero-dark-hundred, you're at the door, not knowing what's at the other side, but you know the mission.
take a moment.
you're so close.
come on, charles.
you're right there.
you're right here!
calm yourself, you're gonna get this done.
i want you to think about it.
there you go.
that's it.
dig deep!
everything you got!
i'm right here with you.
dude, not even five feet.
get up!
don't quit now!
don't stop now!
finish strong!
finish hard!
you're right there!
don't stop!
you're so close!
two feet!
keep going!
you got it!
yes!
hell yeah.
yes!
hell yeah!
all right, boys.
here's the deal.
you created an epic moment, and you kicked its ass!
you won!
congratulations!
you kicked ass!
that's it!
i love it!
when you get in an environment like that
and you guys are just pulling each other and everything,
you do get a bond.
and now the hope is that whoever gets into the hero's challenge,
basically, i'm protected at this point.
how's it feel?
awesome!
anytime you go through something that's crazy hard,
dangerous, there's just kind of like a bond right there.
and that was this moment.
and right now, shaun, you're in my good books.
that's $15,000 to the red cross.
yeah!
and on top of that,
you made the hero's challenge just a bit easier.
now get your asses back to the penthouse and enjoy it.
and for god's sakes, next time, take the elevator.
the toughest thing about this, to me,
is having that power to send somebody home.
that's gonna be hard.
who do you send home?
the fact that somebody's getting eliminated,
i think that threw everybody for a loop, you know.
that's crazy.
if this guy doesn't make it, then he's going home.
but if he does make it,
he's taking out whoever he wants to take out.
yeah, it's a cold piece.
i mean, even if i went up there, it's a cold piece.
i mean, do you send someone home
because they took a bribe, or do you send someone home
that you know is your real competition?
right.
the person, believe it or not, that might go is darnell.
darnell's a great guy, but, you know,
he won the hero's challenge,
he took the money, so he might go.
whoever goes up there, whoever's voted for,
we know if they don't have all of the time,
then we are sending them home, and that sucks.
and we also know the person that goes in is a true hero.
the vibe has totally shifted.
i see this fear in everyone's face,
because we know what we're sending them out to.
we're, like, sending them out to possibly not come back.
hey.
are you guys home?
yo, yo, yo, yo, yo.
did you do it?
so, you're wet.
did you go swimming?
nope, no swimming.
no swimming?
no swimming.
no swimming at all.
um, that's sweat.
it was nuts.
you did it?
come on!
of course we did it!
so, no swimming?
just beasting
listen.
the hero's challenge tomorrow is swimming.
tomorrow's swimming.
with marty, shaun, charles up for the hero's challenge,
i'm kind of going back and forth on who i want to pick.
did marty say anything about who he'd send home?
he didn't.
i didn't ask him.
do you want to go tomorrow?
i, yeah.
yeah.
oh, yeah.
i definitely want to go to the hero's challenge.
i didn't take the temptation, but i don't want shaun leaving.
this sending people home [bleep] is crap.
i've just been trying to sit on what criteria i'm gonna use
to send someone home.
you know what i mean?
i think if you want to do this game
the way you've been playing it, you know,
you've been playing it with honor and integrity.
so i would get rid of the people that haven't had integrity.
when david's going behind shaun's back,
i feel like a competition like this
isn't about backdoor deals and conspiracies.
it's almost not right.
dude, shaun is your competition.
as soon as this game turned to elimination,
now he dropped his cocky attitude.
and now he's kissing everyone's ass.
you know that.
it's like when murderers go to prison
and they find jesus.
i can't stand shaun,
and my only regret about this elimination
is i'm not the shauninator.
because i would really love to do it.
i'd love to look him in the face and say, "shaun, you're out.
he's smart.
i'm not gonna tell you what to do.
but i'm telling you, he's a manipulator.
we know this.
we've talked about it.
use this, man, okay?
forget this.
this will [bleep] you up every time.
yeah.
use this.
all right.
all right, guys, have a seat.
in 1978, a man named eddie aikau
traveled by traditional boat from hawaii to tahiti.
the ship started to founder at sea, it started to drift.
eddie soon realized that if he didn't get help,
he and the whole crew would die.
so, the very next morning at sunrise,
he decided to swim back for help.
it was an impossible swim ...
miles and miles of open ocean.
the entire crew was saved.
eddie was never seen again.
in hawaii, where i was raised,
when our backs are against the wall, we have a saying.
eddie would go.
in the hawaiian language, we have a word ... "mana.
it means "spirit." warrior mana.
it's the basis and the foundation of my tattoo
that i proudly wear on my body ... warrior spirit.
i'm gonna ask that of you today.
one of you three will have to find your warrior spirit,
your warrior mana.
you're gonna be faced with
a torturous open-ocean swim ... over a mile.
you find your warrior mana.
you know what?
eddie aikau's one of my heroes.
i don't have many heroes, but he's my hero.
i've read his story.
i know what he did.
and i've always wanted to wear eddie's shirt.
and as the rock said, "eddie would go.
and i never bought a shirt
because i can't fill this man's shoes.
and i am scared to swim a mile in the ocean.
i know my limitations.
i know how much i can swim, and i've never done that before.
and i've told all you guys to your face
i'm not here for the money.
and i was gonna tell you why i'm here.
and that is exactly why i'm here, to find my mana.
that's what i need to live, to do my job,
to be a husband, to be a son.
and it's like, when you said that, that's just what i'm not.
i'm not a swimmer, i'm not a warrior,
but i'm just pleading with you guys.
let me find out my mana so i can say, "charles would go,
so i can buy that shirt and i'll wear it with pride.
eddie would go.
i would rather go home not completing the challenge
than to sit here and be safe.
don't be afraid to let me fail, please.
if you're trying to protect me, you're not.
please send me.
please.
i feel that.
i see it.
send me.
i see it in your eyes.
patty?
i'm gonna ask you something about marty.
i know you look at him like he's your son.
if he's chosen and he goes, it's open ocean.
it's dangerous.
are you scared that he may not make it?
no way.
i'm gonna stop you right there.
i'm not afraid of marty not making it.
marty's already made it.
there are going to be thousands and thousands of young kids
that are going to want to be martys,
and i am pumped that i've got two in my house.
so, marty, you already made it, and i love you.
i mean it, man.
thank you.
you are a tremendous young man.
thank you.
you know, i just want the shot.
i just want my dad and my brother to watch me and to be proud.
and that's why, like i said, from the beginning,
every challenge i go in, i'm gonna go absolutely 100%.
i've been 100% legit with everybody.
this is how i really am, so i just want my shot, man.
i just want to do it.
shaun, the floor's yours.
rock asked a question last week.
he said, "do you feel heroic?
and when i considered that question, i really thought about it.
i've done things i've never done before.
i've hung off buildings.
i'm handling snakes.
i'm making tough decisions that weren't the popular decision.
but instead of hiding from it,
i let everybody know that i made that decision.
and i sacrificed myself when i could have looked good ...
there was a situation where i could have looked good.
athena took money.
i could have looked real good.
i could have stepped back and let her take the heat.
i couldn't do it, man.
five people jumped down her throat,
and i'm not damning anybody for that.
but it's in my soul.
no matter which one of you
were standing there at that very time,
i could not possibly let any of you
get ganged up on by five people.
there was no way.
and i had her back.
i sacrificed myself, and at the end of that,
i still looked worse than she did,
even though her wound was more fresh.
and, yeah, i feel pretty damn heroic.
one thing i want to do today
is i want to go in this hero's challenge
because i would much rather go out
and fail that challenge and be sent home that way
than for somebody to come back here and say, "shaun, you're out.
i don't need that.
with that, it's time to vote.
it's time to vote.
all right.
big moment of truth.
this week's hero is...
yes!
oh, my god!
oh, my god.
thank you!
oh, my god.
i'm gonna kill this.
oh, thank you, guys.
thank you.
yes!
guys, i want to tell you something right now, and i want you to listen to me when i tell you this.
we've had four hero's challenges so far, all men.
when do the women step up?
step up.
or step out.
but step up.
marty, meet me at the marina.
oh, my god.
oh, thank you, guys.
i'm not gonna let you down.
don't worry.
it's been so long since i've wanted something so bad.
and i had no doubt
that every single person in my team felt it in their hearts.
but you know what?
i appreciate them.
they wanted to protect me.
they knew marty was a better swimmer,
and they didn't want me to not come back.
you'll get your shot, bro.
i promise, all right?
you know, the funny thing is by trying to protect me,
they actually hurt me more than they could ever know.
they hurt me so bad today.
i wanted to go.
all right.
i'm ready, man.
you're ready?
how you feeling?
hell yeah.
i'm just ready to get in the water, yeah.
thinking about mana.
you're thinking about mana?
i love it.
well, this is how it's gonna work.
okay, 10 miles out to sea,
there's gonna be a sunken ship out there.
it's gonna be sticking out of the water.
all right.
you're gonna take this speedboat 9 miles.
that last mile is on you.
cool.
you're gonna be left there in the open ocean.
i want you to swim to that ship,
and i want you to retrieve the money
that's gonna be tied to a buoy at the end of the ship.
$60,000.
okay.
you get that $60,000, get back in that speedboat,
and get your ass right back here to me.
hell yeah.
yep.
all right?
since you guys won the team challenge,
you have 40 minutes to complete this swim.
cool.
warrior spirit.
you find that mana.
yep.
get it.
thanks, bud.
all right.
thank you.
let's go.
come on.
the hero's challenge is a lot bigger now.
you know, if you lose, you're going home.
if you win, you know, you got to send someone else home.
so it got a lot more real, real quick, you know?
this is what i live for, you know?
i live for adrenaline.
i live for competition.
it's just how i am, man.
that's just, like, the basis of me.
i'm just a competitor in everything i do.
you know, i just want to prove myself.
once i hit that water, it was immediately, boom!
i took off.
but honestly, the waves were too big,
and every time i would turn my head to get some air,
i'd get blasted in the side of the face with a wave and swallow a bunch of water, so it was pretty tough.
it is the chance for failure that makes a hero rise above.
that's what i'm looking for ...
someone who will put it all on the line.
when you're up against that adversity
and you're up against that current and it's one on one, you and the open ocean, it's all on you.
that's when you see what a person is made of right there.
this hero's challenge is pure endurance.
he will either return a hero or have exhausted everything trying.
and marty is still in very treacherous waters.
so, we're gonna be calling him michael phelps when he gets back?
who knows?
marty could come home and pack his things.
we don't know that.
it just depends on the time.
what's the full time?
i don't even know.
we never know.
my heart would be broken if marty didn't come back.
i definitely look at marty like my son,
and i think he looks at me like his mom.
i hope so.
should probably get your phone number before you leave.
i'm kind of kidding.
kind of not.
i'm praying to god
that marty doesn't walk through the door.
i'm just thinking if he doesn't come home,
that means i'm not going home
and i can stay a little bit longer.
to swim a mile against the current in 2-, 3-foot waves,
like, that's a pretty gnarly test.
rock's story in the war room was sick
about that guy eddie that swam miles and miles and miles.
that's beast, man.
that's a hero.
there was a time where i pictured my dad and my brother
and my loved ones on that boat, and i'm like,
it's up to me to get there to save them.
and once i saw that buoy, i started booking.
i am so close.
once my family sees what i did, you know, swimming in the ocean,
they're probably gonna be like, "man, you are a badass.
honestly, man, it was pretty rough,
but i put my mind to it.
i didn't give up.
i just hope that i did it.
you know, if you lose, you're going home.
there's no ifs, ands, or buts about it.
you're gone.
come on.
you beasted it!
yes!
oh, my gosh!
yes!
oh!
ahh.
congratulations, man!
yes!
oh!
thank you!
$60,000.
congratulations.
you made it in time, man.
that's hard to do.
very, very impressive, man.
i'm proud of you.
thank you so much.
thank you.
congratulations.
you know what the deal is now.
someone's going home,
and it's up to you who you send home.
but i have a new offer for you.
a hero's twist.
you just won $60,000 for the prize pot.
i'll give you $30,000.
the only thing is,
you got to eliminate yourself from the competition.
if not, then the $60,000 goes back into the global prize pot
and you have to eliminate one of your teammates.
i want you to think about it, but don't think too long.
boom!
what do you want to do?
you can take the $60,000, bud.
i'm putting it right in the pot.
you're putting it back in the pot?
hell yeah.
well, marty, it's your money.
you put it back in the pot.
all right.
all right, well, now, that said, you're gonna have to send somebody packing, send somebody home.
who's it gonna be?
um... you know, it's a tough decision.
you never want to send anyone home, but, um...
i'm gonna have to say...
a mile swimming?
yeah.
could you have done it?
yeah.
don't believe you.
all right.
that's why i didn't vote for you.
i didn't want you to go home.
that's sweet.
is marty gonna go home?
i don't know.
i would have gone home.
i honestly don't want anybody to go home.
i'm not ready to go, and i'm thinking marty is either gonna send shaun or he's going to send me home.
there's a positive and a negative to keeping shaun till the end.
one, he's a good competitor.
and two, he is a villain.
so it would make me look better, you know, if it comes down to me and him.
shaun, he's a liar, but i know athena,
she's got the same qualities, you know?
and they both did the same dirty move.
yo, bro!
look at you smiling all big!
you can't even keep it a secret in your face, man!
i think marty might want to get rid of me.
i don't know why i think that, but, i mean, it's a game.
he might think i'm his biggest competition to sell me out,
and the fact that i might be going home
is not cool because i want to finish this thing.
you know i'm so proud of you.
i can tell.
ohh!
did you get it done?
yeah, i smoked it.
got the job done!
i am so pumped that i know marty's home,
and i think some snake's gonna leave this condo
and we might actually have a chance
at rebuilding a really super-strong team.
the hero's got some serious decisions to make, you know, especially with this new hero's twist, you know.
so, oh, man.
so, this was not an easy decision, you know.
my choice is...
__file_terminal__
for thousands of years, we've wondered if we're alone in the cosmos.
life - is it a one time event... ..or is it something that's occurred lots of times throughout the universe?
and, at this very moment, new discoveries are bringing us closer to the answers.
we are right on the cusp of being able to say life exists somewhere else.
all of our searching is leading to one ultimate goal..
finding intelligent life somewhere in the vastness of the universe.
if we could discover an advanced civilisation, it would be clearly the greatest discovery of humanity, beating out fire.
get ready, because the known universe is about to take you on a hunt for life out there.
over the next hour, we'll show you how the hunt for alien life has dramatically changed over the past few decades.
the lessons we're learning at the bottom of our oceans and in yellowstone's acid pits are giving us dramatic insight into how life came to be on our planet.
and it's helping us understand and imagine how life might emerge on an alien world.
we'll take you on a journey to faraway planets, where amazing creatures may roam the lands.
creatures that make the wildest science fiction movies look like reality shows.
and, finally, we'll show you how new technologies are being used to search for, and possibly communicate with, advanced alien civilisations.
so is earth the only planet where life has emerged in this vast cosmos?
are we alone?
or are we part of something bigger- a web of life that stretches light years through the universe?
are we alone?
and it ties into all the big questions:
how did we get here?
where are we going?
are we a part of a bigger picture?
but for many years the question was taboo to science.
before the mid-1 990s, it was considered somewhat embarrassing to even address the question,
because looking for alien life seems a little frighteningly close to science fiction.
for decades, the furthest we got in looking for aliens was imagining them on the silver screen.
man:
what is your name?
after all, alien life needs a home.
and we hadn't even found a planet outside our own solar system.
scientists, in fact, never talked about planets around other stars.
there was no way to detect them and so it was one of those domains of science that you couldn't answer, and, therefore, you didn't talk about it.
ln 1 995, astronomers discovered a planet orbiting a star 50 light years from earth.
and since then, they've found hundreds more.
for the first time in human history, we realised that our sun, with its eight major planets that go around it, is just one type of a planetary system, one example of billions.
these discoveries are exciting, but don't expect to be contacting extraterrestrial life on these planets any time soon.
while it's been a spectacular ride in the last decade to find these planets, most of them are giant planets.
most of the worlds we've found are gas giants, which probably couldn't support life.
you can't stand on them.
there's no hard surface.
they're large balls of hydrogen and helium gas, like jupiter and saturn.
we found a few rocky planets with hard surfaces, but they're many times more massive than earth and contain the most hostile environments you could ever imagine.
one such planet, corot 7b, orbits so close to its star that surface temperatures reach as high as 1,600 degrees celsius.
sunrise here does not bring the sound of birdsong.
instead, it's an armageddon of volcanic explosions.
those planets are all going to be so hot, you can't develop something as complex as life.
scientists have gone back to the drawing board looking to find worlds capable of supporting life, small rocky planets like earth.
we don't know that life has to evolve on the surface of small, rocky planets.
but we know it did once, here on earth.
and so, it's a reasonable place to start the search.
earth is important because we know that this little planet had everything needed to create life.
and if a distant world has similar conditions, there's at least a possibility life could emerge there, too.
if you were to give a biologist a piece of paper and say, "write down on every line something you need for life.
they'll say you need an energy source, you need oxygen, you need water, you need carbon, you need organic compounds, you need amino acids, you need all this stuff.
there's a long list of factors that make our earth special and perfectly suited for life.
but the most important is its distance from our energy source - the sun.
at 1 49 million kilometres away, the earth is at just the right place for water to exist as a liquid.
so why is liquid water important?
imagine a world so much hotter than the earth that there are no oceans, no liquid water at all on its surface.
such a place would be like a desert.
without water, there's nothing to let the grains of sand interact.
and in the same way, without water, there's nothing to allow the atoms - the carbon and oxygen and trace elements - to form the molecules that would give rise to the chemistry of life.
on the other hand, on a world much colder than the earth, water can only exist as ice, and we have another problem.
this frozen block of sand has all of the grains of sand locked together.
they can't move around and interact, just the same way that on a frozen world, the atoms and molecules can't move around and interact to form the chemistry necessary for life.
but if temperatures and conditions are just right, like here on earth, you get liquid water.
the water allows the sand grains to flow together and intermingle and form more complex structures.
ln the same way, water acts like a cocktail mixer, allowing the atoms and molecules to come together and ultimately form the building blocks of life.
all that water was perfect for breeding life.
lots of it.
it's estimated that since the emergence of earth's first life form, 1 00 billion species have existed on the planet.
millions are alive right now, and that fact alone tells scientists a lot as they comb the cosmos for alien life.
if we look for life in the universe we have to understand it will come in different shapes and sizes.
and the same thing occurs here on earth.
take this handful of dirt.
it's not just dirt, there's a lot going on in here.
there's an earthworm.
go in a little more... ..and there are these tiny little mites.
zoom in further... ..and there are these little creatures called protozoa.
and smaller still... ..there's bacteria, billions of them.
so you see, there really are a lot of living things in a handful of dirt and we should probably remember that if we ever go digging around on alien worlds.
life isn't always something you can see with the naked eye.
ln these piles of dirt lie the secrets to our origins.
and scientists are keeping that in perspective when they search for life in the cosmos.
you have to be looking for that bacterium first, because that's gonna be far more common.
if we don't find that, the chance of finding these tall, elegant, grey, et guys is gonna be highly diminished.
so are there other earths out there capable of supporting extraterrestrial life, or even bacteria?
we're closer than ever to finding the answers, because scientists have picked up the scent in this cosmic hunt.
ln the hunt for alien life, scientists are focusing their efforts on finding small, rocky planets like earth.
but searching for another earth is like trying to find a needle in a million haystacks.
because, from trillions of kilometres away, these small planets get lost in the blinding glare of their star's brightness.
the sad truth of the matter is that earth-like planets are mere cosmic specks of dust, and, therefore, detecting them is really quite hard.
hard, but not impossible.
every now and again, the planet passes directly between us and the star.
and if it does that, it's like a little eclipse and the starlight drops.
it gets darker because the planet is blocking the light from that star.
and it turns out we can see that.
with this in mind, scientists built one of the world's most sensitive telescopes and launched it into space.
the mission, called kepler, may not help us find extra terrestrial life but it could help us find its home.
kepler will simply do one thing unbelievably well - measure the brightnesses of 1 00,000 stars over and over and over, looking for a few of those 1 00,000 stars that dim.
seeing the tiniest dim from a small planet travelling in front of a star thousands of light years away isn't easy to imagine, but the kepler telescope is one of the most sensitive cameras ever built.
to give you an idea just how sensitive kepler is, l'm gonna demonstrate using this massive world war ll searchlight.
the brightness of that searchlight represents the extreme luminosity of stars and l'm gonna use this tiny marble to represent the planet.
when this planet passes in front of the star, it blocks out a tiny fraction of the light, dimming the star by a very small amount.
and that's exactly what the kepler spacecraft can detect.
kepler can detect a .01 per cent change in a star's luminosity.
but even if it spots a dimming star, there's still another problem.
when kepler sees a star that dims, it could be due to a speck of dust that crossed in front of the telescope.
there's a possibility of binary stars - two stars that orbit each other, thereby dimming the stars as one blocks the other.
to make sure kepler's truly found a planet, scientists are using one of the largest earth-based telescopes for confirmation.
this telescope will also determine the planet's mass and distance from its star.
scientists are most interested in the small, rocky worlds that sit in what's called the goldilocks zone.
remember how important liquid water is to life?
if a planet is in the goldilocks zone, it's not too close and not too far from its star.
it'sjust right.
and it's possible for water to flow there as a liquid.
we obviously sit in the goldilocks zone, but in our solar system, mars and venus also do, but we've yet to find life on either of those two planets.
knowing if a planet is inhabitable is not as straightforward as saying,
oh, we found a planet the size of the earth and it's 90 million miles from a sun-like star.
venus is uninhabitable and mars is uninhabitable.
why is venus such a harsh, hideous environment, some 600 degrees celsius or so?
and, of course, the answer for venus, sadly, is that some greenhouse effect, global warming, has overtaken venus.
when it formed over four billion years ago,
venus had water, and probably vast oceans on its surface.
but there was also a lot of the greenhouse gas water vapour in the atmosphere, which blanketed and heated the planet.
and as venus got hotter, more and more water from its surface evaporated into the atmosphere, trapping the heat even more.
on earth, much of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide is chemically bound to the rocks.
and it was this way on young venus, too.
but when it got to about 400 degrees celsius, this carbon dioxide started baking out of the rocks and into the atmosphere.
with an atmosphere of water vapour and carbon dioxide, this cycle kept going and going and the runaway greenhouse effect has left venus dry, lifeless, and a scorching 480 degrees celsius.
even if it weren't that hot, the atmospheric pressure at the surface is 90 times the earth's atmospheric pressure, so you'd be crushed.
and it has sulphuric acid rain.
you know, venus is basically, by every definition, hell.
and yet, if you were to detect venus orbiting another star, you might suspect it would have earth-like conditions.
mars also lies in the goldilocks zone, but it has the opposite problem of venus.
it doesn't have enough greenhouse gases to trap in heat and it's become a cold, barren, desert world.
we have two examples of how planets have gone astray and we have to wonder how many other ways are there that a planet can fail to be habitable.
with so many ways a habitable planet can be rendered uninhabitable,
kepler's findings are crucial, because the more potential homes it finds, the better the chance life might exist outside our little earth.
ln five years, we will know for certain, from kepler's results, how frequent earth-like planets are.
it will do this by only looking at 1 00,000 stars out of at least 200 billion in our galaxy.
but how is it possible to calculate the number of earth-like planets orbiting other stars without looking at all the stars?
it's like asking how many blades of grass are there on this soccer field.
l could either get down on my hands and knees here and spend the rest of my life counting every single one or l could do what kepler's going to do, which we call sampling.
we have a little grid - two inches by two inches on each side.
all l have to do now is count the number of blades of grass in that little two-inch square and then multiply by the number of squares that would cover this whole field.
let's do it.
one, two, three... 24, 25, 26, 27... 33, 34, 35... 47...
l wonder if l counted that one.
207.
207 blades of grass in a two inch by two inch patch.
now, let's get out the calculator here and see what that means.
207 divided by two inches by two inches means 52 blades of grass per square inch.
now we need the number of square inches in this field.
it's 1 80 by 360.
wow, that's almost 1 0 million square inches in this field.
so, multiply that by 52 - half a billion blades of grass and l only had to count 207.
if kepler does find earth-like planets, this method of sampling will bring us one step closer to understanding how many habitable homes are in our galaxy.
even if one out of a thousand stars in the milky way galaxy has a planet like the earth that means there are millions and millions of earths orbiting other stars.
so if you ask me:
ls there life out there?
it seems awfully likely.
ln the grand scope of the cosmos, we've considered ourselves pretty lucky to be at just the right spot and to have all the right ingredients for life to emerge.
but is it really luck?
or does life find a way?
there are new discoveries showing us there might just be another recipe for life to emerge.
we have a general idea of what conditions are crucial for life to thrive on a planet.
we know liquid water plays a role, and we know life needs an energy source.
for us, that's our sun.
and for a long time, scientists believed that every single life form on earth got their energy from our star.
that was until an underwater explorer, who discovered the titanic, also helped discover something else deep in the ocean.
by far, the most important discovery l've ever made was not the titanic.
it was when we discovered this whole new life system on our planet.
we thought all life needed access to sunlight, but working with the wood's hole oceanographic institute,
bob ballard found a thriving ecosystem where there was no sunlight.
there were creatures we'd never seen before.
one of the dominant organisms was what we call a tube worm and these were 6, 8 feet tall, and they had human-like blood.
and when they wanted to respirate, they would stick out the tube, basically their lung.
prior to that discovery, we thought that all life on the earth owed its existence to the sun.
without sunlight, there was something else giving this life energy.
it was coming from deep inside the earth's core.
something called black smokers, or hydrothermal vents, were bringing up minerals from deep underground.
and this was an amazing discovery because the temperature coming out of the bottom of the ocean was 650 degrees fahrenheit.
hot enough to melt lead.
amazingly, this life thrived in an extremely hostile environment, which meant we needed to expand our narrow view of where life might be found.
we have to understand that life will evolve under conditions which seem horribly hostile, horribly alien.
and yet, it not only evolves and works, it thrives and has a whole ecosystem that depends on these bizarre environments.
and the bizarre environments didn't stop at the bottom of the ocean.
life is found in the worst environments you could imagine.
like the boiling hot springs of yellowstone national park.
the hot springs at yellowstone can be ph1 , just like battery acid... ..and 1 94 degrees.
if you went into this, it would dissolve you.
dr mark young is an astrobiologist looking very closely at yellowstone's hot springs.
he thinks these acid pits may be one of our biggest clues to understanding how life emerged on earth.
three billion years ago, planet earth was much more like what we see in yellowstone - boiling acid, very high temperatures, where life was dependent not so much on photosynthesis, but on the chemicals that are found
and the gases that come out of the boiling hot springs like yellowstone.
those pits in yellowstone are just nasty.
ln fact, the acid in them can dissolve just about anything.
l have some acid here that's a little more concentrated than you'll find in yellowstone, but the results will be the same.
now watch what happens to this penny when l drop it in the acid.
l'm gonna put this bell jar over to control the environment.
the green colour is copper coming from the penny and a noxious fume is being emitted.
and that's an oxide of nitrogen that is very hazardous, and l'm glad l have it in a bell jar.
what amazes me is that scientists are finding life aplenty in environments similar to that, and that just goes to show that life can flourish in even the harshest conditions.
we're finding micro-organisms not only living in these hot springs but flourishing.
wherever there's liquid water - no matter the amount of light, the temperature, the acidity - life thrives.
this revolutionary discovery is opening us up to the possibility that life may exist in places we never thought possible.
even under the surfaces of planets or nearby moons.
what's incredible is that it turns out that even in our own little solar system, there are diversity places where there could be life.
ln 2008, a probe visited to the martian surface, the phoenix mars lander, and it made an amazing discovery.
phoenix dug down into the dirt, and after only a couple of inches, uncovered crystals of frozen water.
the key question is; how far down does the water persist beneath the surface and if you go far enough, is the pressure and temperature high enough that the water would be liquid, not in the form of ice?
and there's a very good suggestion, l think, that there are, in fact, liquid aquifers.
we might be able to drill down and find the evidence, if any, of life on mars at this moment.
and scientists are also excited about what they believe to be an ocean underneath the surface of jupiter's frozen moon, europa.
sure, it's cold and solid in the form of ice on the surface, but almost certainly, beneath the ice on europa is a vast ocean, hundreds, if not thousands, of kilometres thick.
europa sits well outside the goldilocks zone, but just like at the bottom of earth's oceans, hydrothermal vents could be the energy source needed for life to emerge.
those ocean depths could be home to some bizarre life forms - huge tubeworms feeding on the minerals coming from inside europa's core.
there's no telling what kind of life may exist in europa's ocean.
but one of the most fascinating places in our solar system is saturn's largest moon, titan.
titan's atmosphere and surface features are similar to earth's 3.5 billion years ago.
titan is one of the larger moons in the solar system and the only one to have a substantial atmosphere.
and the atmosphere has lots of methane in it.
and it's cold enough that the methane precipitates and drops, like raindrops, and falls out onto the surface of titan.
not liquid water, but liquid methane.
on earth, methane is a flammable gas, but the temperatures on titan are so cold, minus 1 80 degrees celsius, that the methane can form liquid.
titan actually has lakes, rain and rivers made of liquid natural gas, liquid methane.
that probably isn't quite as good as water, but at least it's a medium.
things can flow around, begin to form bonds.
fluid is where it's at.
the idea that life can emerge from a different kind of liquid is adding a whole new dimension to our search.
it's possible that life elsewhere in the universe can thrive with other liquids, not just water, and so we have to keep our eyes open.
other environments very different from that on the earth could harbour life.
new discoveries constantly shift our perspective on where alien life might exist.
and as we continue investigating the clues to this cosmic mystery, we have to remember to keep an open mind.
because life out there might be stranger than hollywood could have ever dreamt up.
the hunt for life in the cosmos is intensifying.
new discoveries have opened us up to the possibility that life could exist closer than we ever imagined, right in our own solar system.
but even if that doesn't pan out, there are billions of stars out there just like our sun
with potentially billions of planets harbouring life, like earth.
it's completely reasonable to think that there's life out there.
there's just so many possibilities - billions of stars and billions of galaxies, and dah-duh, dah-duh, dah-duh.
surely there's life out there.
finding life, even primitive microbial life, would change our place in the universe by telling us that we're not alone.
and it would most likely be an indication that we're getting closer to finding an intelligent civilisation.
it would be really fun if we could find an alien that could, you know, send me an email or twitter or whatever, all day long, but the profound question is life or nonlife.
once we have the microbial, we have the potential for intelligence.
but if we don't have a life form at all, we don't have the potential for anything.
what if we do find complex life out there?
what would it look like?
would it be anything like what we see in hollywood movies?
it is humorous that hollywood depicts aliens more or less the same way.
there's a klingon here and a romulan there and there's slanty eyes and, you know, big old brains and so on.
any sort of alien that resembles a human is ludicrous - two eyes, a nose, and a mouth.
there's no reason an alien would have to be adapted this way.
over hundreds of millions of years, all the creatures of our planet have adapted to their environment, so the chemistries are similar, which means your genetic makeup isn't all that different from an earthworm, or even your pet.
basically, all animals are worms.
we're worms - we've got a head, we've got a tail.
we're long and skinny and that's how we move forward.
dinosaurs are worms.
what people don't understand is that evolution is not a road map.
humans are not at the top of the evolutionary ladder.
we're not the end point, the goal of evolution, or anything like that.
we're accidents, we're random.
we eat through our mouths but we breathe through our mouths and we can choke on food.
that's a terrible design.
it's an accident of evolution.
maybe aliens evolved differently.
maybe they don't need to breathe.
maybe they can get oxygen in some other way.
anything like that can go, as long as it makes sense for the environment.
so life on another planet would adapt to its environment and could be stranger than you could ever imagine.
it's fun to speculate about how life might evolve under conditions that are very different from those here on the earth.
if you lived on a planet with twice the gravity of earth, there'd be a lot more pull on your body and you'd come crashing down twice as hard if you fell.
so perhaps creatures there would have stronger, stockier bodies with more legs closer to the ground.
a planet with very little gravity would be like our moon or mars.
l can imagine a creature on a low gravity planet as being...
long and spindly.
life on a low gravity planet might be tall and thin, with long legs.
if life evolved on a very dense planet where the atmosphere is soupy or water-like, you could see creatures as big as whales or elephants actually flying, not through the air, but through this liquid-like atmosphere.
l think we are currently ignorant, actually, about the real realistic diversity of life elsewhere.
life in the universe may be incredibly diverse.
but could it all have come from the same place?
panspermia is the idea espoused at the beginning of the classic battlestar galactica that life here began out there.
the building blocks of life on our planet may have originated elsewhere and were transported here when a meteorite collided with earth.
comets have a lot of organic materials on them.
some meteorites have amino acids in them.
these are the building blocks, the precursors, of life.
so at least the building blocks of life could have come from space.
it seems unimaginable because life, or the building blocks of life, would have had to survive an impact with our planet.
here at nasa's ames research center in northern california, astronomer peter schultz and his team are testing to see if this theory of panspermia is even remotely possible.
it's good.
here l've got the projectile that is embedded with some organics.
so the real question is; will this survive if we hammer it at a high speed?
we're gonna be firing this at around three-and-a-half kilometres per second.
this would be about the speed of something surviving entry into the atmosphere.
schultz will create a high-speed impact using nasa's vertical gun, which will fire the projectile at 1 6,000 kilometres per hour, that's ten times faster than a bullet.
this is a pretty special gun.
it uses a lot of gunpowder but then compresses hydrogen gas, and then it's released, and then the hydrogen gas expands.
when it expands, the projectile continues on down into the impact chamber and that's when things happen.
this is where it all happens.
this is the impact chamber.
the projectile's gonna come through this hole, slam into this target, which is about two feet across - this is just ordinary sand - and we'll see if it survives.
with the vertical gun loaded and the impact chamber set, it's time to test and see if the organic material laced onto the projectile can survive a high-speed impact.
this drives me nuts.
oh!
ok.
this was...gorgeous.
whoa!
l...
l hope there's stuff left.
the key now is to go back in there, dig out these pieces and see if we can find any survivors, literally survivors.
we gotta go see what we did.
oh, what a mess.
oh, this is dynamite.
schultz scours the impact chamber, hunting for remnants of the projectile.
this is like looking for your lost contact on a beach.
let's see what we have.
oh, that is so sweet.
we did the experiment, we collected some pieces.
we showed that we actually got solid pieces that survived impact, and embedded within that solid piece are amino acids.
you can see it here in this image.
you can see the fracturing, but even though it's fractured, it's not melted.
panspermia is not that far-fetched after all.
it says you can transport the seeds of life, if not life itself, from one planet to another.
however life began on our planet, it eventually evolved to develop intelligence.
and ultimately, our goal is to see if that's happened somewhere else in the universe.
what we're really looking for is, you know, spock.
we're looking for another civilisation that's either like us or not like us, but is clearly intelligent.
that's the holy grail of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence.
with so many stars and so many planets out there, it would truly be a surprise if intelligent life did not exist somewhere in the universe, perhaps even nearby in our own galaxy.
with the closest stars light years away, is it possible to actually travel there?
or will first contact be made some other way?
right now, in our own milky way galaxy alone, there may be numerous intelligent alien civilisations.
but why haven't we contacted or been contacted by any of them?
first of all, there's a lot of empty space out there.
the very nearest star to us is four light years away.
they could send us a signal, in four years' time it would get here, and then we could reply eight years later to them.
that's the closest star.
what about communicating with people across the galaxy where there are tens of thousands or a hundred thousand light years in between?
if we wanted to pop over and borrow a cup of sugar, it would take some 700,000 years for us to bring the sugar home.
so that's a very big problem.
with the nearest star 400 trillion kilometres away, our current technology could get us there in, say, 1 00,000 years, so travelling to see an alien civilisation clearly isn't going to work.
but how about we just call them up?
after all, radio signals travel at the speed of light.
if we are going to communicate with aliens, that's gonna be the most boring conversation we've ever had, because if they're beaming radio waves at us and they're 1 00 light years away, and they say, "hey, how's the weather down there on earth?
it takes a hundred years to get here and we say,
hey, it's fine.
how are things there on globnarp?
another hundred years back and forth.
it's a century travel time.
that's a boring conversation.
the chances that two intelligent civilisations have the ability to communicate, the desire to communicate, and are around long enough to communicate makes this cosmic chat even tougher.
so we've been intelligent in the sense we've had the same brain size for about 1 00,000 years.
yet we've only been able to communicate for the past 50 years - a tiny fraction, meaning if another civilisation communicated with us 200 years ago, we would have missed the signal altogether.
there can be a lot of miscommunications when trying a cosmic chat.
we could think of communicating with an alien civilisation as like a game of cosmic catch.
the stadium...is the galaxy.
and the ball is our message.
so if we send the ball out into the stadium, odds are nobody's there to receive it.
of course, we could luck out and actually send our message towards an alien civilisation.
but what if that civilisation was technologically 500 years or more behind where we are?
well, that would be like throwing a baseball to a baby.
of course, if everything is just right and there is another technological civilisation out there capable of receiving our message...
here you go.
well, that would be our first contact with an extraterrestrial civilisation.
since it would be a long time before we could have a face-to-face conversation, the best thing we can do for now isjust to listen.
at the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, seth shostack is doing just that.
these are the individual antennas of the allen telescope array.
it's one of the most powerful observatories in the world and, in fact, the kind of thing that could check out millions of star systems.
if you can check out a few million star systems, you have a really good chance of finding a signal from et.
radio waves or tv signals have recognisable patterns, so shostack and other scientists are listening for deliberate signals from an alien planet.
these telescopes listen to hundreds of thousands to millions of stars at the same time and they do it 24 hours a day.
these distances between stars are enormously vast.
most interstellar visiting is gonna be via signalling, not by actual visiting.
and what are we broadcasting out into the cosmos?
television transmissions have been travelling away from the earth for about 50 years.
l love lucy and gilligan's island have been broadcast to the galaxy, travelling at the speed of light, and they are our emissaries, they are our diplomats to the galaxy.
our ultra-high frequency and microwave radio signals have been expanding into space at the speed of light.
these radio, radar, and television signals fill a sphere nearly 1 00 light years in diameter, so any civilisation within 1 00 light years of earth might be hearing our voices or watching our television shows.
we're sending transmissions out into the cosmos, but suppose we detect a signal from an alien civilisation.
how would we respond?
it's something we've thought about a lot.
the united nations has even drawn up a manifesto about what we would do.
when the day comes that we pick up a transmission from an alien civilisation, we as a species, frankly, will face our greatest challenge ever, l think.
it raises the question, who represents earth?
who represents the homo sapiens?
and l think the only way to decide this will be with some very seriously thought-out process.
but if we do pick up a signal from an alien race, not everyone thinks it's such a good idea to answer back.
there will be those who, l think, understandably, will argue that we humans should remain hidden in the great galactic tall grasses, because, of course, maybe they're hungry, for example, and would like some hors d'oeuves.
would aliens really want to do us harm?
probably not.
aliens we contact will at least have learned to live with themselves peacefully.
for them to exist in any numbers in the galaxy, they would have to have long lifetimes as intelligent, technological, communicating civilisations.
we are closer than ever to finding answers to one of mankind's greatest questions..
are we alone?
there is something in us that wants to find our place.
what is our purpose?
maybe that purpose is just to be nice to each other and just to seek and explore and to discover.
we are exploring and every discovery we make will help us understand our very existence.
we want to be a part of something bigger than ourselves.
we know deep down that our lives are flickering moments of glory.
we would like to know that there's a higher purpose, that we're a part of something bigger.
are we simply one small piece in the cosmicjigsaw puzzle or are we truly the only special beings in this vast universe?
finding the answer could be mankind's greatest challenge.
__file_terminal__
mortal kombat!
mortal kombatnis not about death
nthe preservation of life
liu kang and few fightersnfrom the earth realm defeated outworld sorcerernshang tsung
according to the rulesnof mortal kombat their victory preserved earth'snsafety for another generation
our chosen onesnwere returned to earth only to enjoyna brief period of peace
for someone from outworldnhas a different point of view
emperor of outworld
the earthnwas created in six days so shall it be destroyed
nmankind will rest in peace!
this is not good
somehow he's opened gatewaysnto your world
our mortal kombat victorynclosed those portals
what closes can open again
what does that mean?
mother
you're alive
too bad you will die
nyou will never rule this world
nyour world becomes mine!
you will never win
master
this ends now!
you hide behind a human?
lord rayden?
you hid behind themnyour entire life
johnny!
or he dies
i'll take your generals
earth does not bendnto the will of tyrants
you would never letnone of your humans die
trade me for johnny cage
come bow at my feet
you fool!
you will bow to me!
it has begun!
we can't let kahn get away
we can't win here
annihilate 'em!
we must go
move back!
kahn opened the portal
your planet and outworldnhave begun to merge into one
think of it as hell on earth
my mother resurrected
how is that possible?
your mother sindelnmay be the key
this can't be!
nwe won the tournament!
the rules say earth is safenfor another generation
kahn has broken the rules
he resurrected sindel to keepnthese portals open indefinitely
nkahn's spell will be broken your mother's soulnwill be at peace and his portals closed
how could the elder godsnallow this?
they do not know
nor your world will perish
we have six daysnuntil annihilation
i beat shang tsungni can beat kahn
you beat a great sorcerer but you're no match for kahn
nit's me
enough!
you are far from ready hunting
i am telling you thisnfor your own good
kahn knows i have no powersnin outworld
ni will lose my powers on earth
ntogether
we are the only hope
we couldn't even save johnny
what do these do?
you canngo anywhere on earth in hours
the inner winds propel you it'll benlike you're not moving
sonya
i'll take younto your partner jax
nbut i'm not losing anybody else you are vulnerable
nyou can do much
what about us?
you two will travelnto the hopi mesa
nbut now you need help
go deep into the night
seek the counsel of nightwolf
you will not find himnhe will find you
i will speak with the elder godsnand demand answers
ready?
nready
here we go
they are faster than i remember
i can't wait
this is amazing
it's the hot airnfrom earth's core
we harness its energy
where are we?
the interchangenroll to your right
hold on to me
the merger has begun
earth is under attack
it is glorious!
did you make rayden begnbefore destroying him?
rayden is of no concern
you let him live?
he could not be stopped
i have no use for excuses
i have broken the sacred rulesnto keep the portals open
if the elder godsnlearn of our plot we shall bothnsuffer the consequences
i do not understand
how can you fear the elder gods?
nour power will be absolute
until the sixth daynhas passed we can take no chancesnwith rayden and his mortals
do not underestimatenthe power of the human spirit
if anything happens to me
i have lost everything
too
the missile!
you must go
there will be others
i killed you
you killed my older brother
why did you help us?
i helped her
legend says the princessnis the key to stopping kahn
you've been following usnwhy?
kahn reprogrammed smokento come after you in order to keep you apartnfrom queen sindel
how do we get to nightwolf?
nsub-zero
you must help usnif you want to stop kahn
let's hope you succeed
get over here!
take it!
suckers!
i've got to find kitana
kahn wants you to go after her
don't it's over
you alone are not readynfor what's ahead
you'll take the same track backnand turn where i showed you
don't worry about me
is it like this everywhere?
the mergernof the realms grows closer
more of the earthnwill be destroyed
i will meet younat the temple of the elder gods
jax!
thought i was supposednto be rescuing you
i couldn't wait
what have you donento yourself now?
cybernetic strength-enhancers
it quadruplesnyour muscle capacity
you've got a confidence problem
these locks must benon some remote-access mechanism
what you doing here?
everybody split
the facility will be trashednby an extermination squad
nextermination squad?
too
i don't even know them
damn it!
i can't free you
stand backnlet's see what i'm made of
that's what i'm talking about
wish i had these in high school
you'll wishnyou were in high school
hurry!
what is that?
death is the only way out
sonya bladenshao-kahn will be pleased
shao what?
i'll take homeboy
i take it this ain't somethingnwe can talk about
heads up!
catch this!
now what?
cybernetic strength-enhancers!
nice look but i'd lose the wall
i was just gettingna feel for it
watch out
you barbecued his ass
look at this
does this mean what i think?
too bad i didn't get new legs
my squads have claimed thousandsnof innocent souls on earth
i will claim millions you'd be behind barsnin a zoo
sheeva
i would welcome them!
silence!
what is your report?
two of earth's best warriorsnhave been taken
kabaal and stryker
did you make them begnbefore you destroyed them?
i thought if i let them live
i have no use for excuses!
nthis will never happen again
it will never happen again
it is truenthis will never happen again
i need a new general
you can die in dutynor by my hand
centaurs are knownnfor their hunting prowess
i will personallynhunt down every human soul and spare no one!
motaro can't be trusted
i proved myselfnas the protector of sindel
your orders are mine to follow
the energies they wastenwith their sniveling
i would use to capture souls
you are all too impetuousnfor such important work
nqueen sindel unless anyonenhas a different point of view
huh?
it's my animality
who are you?
wouldn't you like to know?
so you're rayden's prodigy
i've seen better
don't sweat it too
nyou know i won mortal kombat
don't get cocky
the tournament had rules anything goes
it was a mistake coming here
you think you're ready
nwould kitana have been captured?
can you help me get her back?
maybe
kitana is important
nyou've got to pass three tests
first one's courage
i don't have timenfor these stupid games!
to test your couragenand find your animality you've got to enterna dream state
how am i supposed to do that?
there's a slow waynand a fast way
no time for the slow way
that's what i thought you'd say
sweet dreams
nbut you failed me
you are not the warriorni thought you were
what if i fail everyone?
your brother's soul is mine!
fight from the inside
nyour faith in yourself that can never be defeated
the fire inside you is killed
you lost kitana
you are not a leader
find that power inside you
feel your animality
you will fail!
i am jade
i have searched the mesanfor you
of all the horrorsndarkness holds to die alone
that is my worst fear
i'm not afraid
this is almostntoo good to be true
the samencould be said about you
my heart belongs to another
i can't
there's not much time left
is this just another dream?
how can you beat shao-kahnnwhen i am too much for you?
nnow you laugh?
you are more pure and faithfulnthan i heard
you have passed the test
a test?
this was just another onenof nightwolf's tests?
we could have killed each other!
but we'll live
i will lead you to the templenof the elder gods
i can't
nit was only his second
i'm not ready
not ready to save kitana?
because she's the key
i can take you to her
she's alive?
i cannot say
we must go
all your past betrayalsni can forgive
please accept this offering
i do not want your death
you test my patience
you destroyed my family
you drove my mothernto kill herself
i am your enemy forever
kill me now if you dare
foolish child
a struggling worm on a hook lands a bigger catchnthan a dead one
no animals
what's going on here?
nature's dying
the merger of the realmsnis almost done
you keep talkingnabout mergers and realms but it don't mean squat to me
i can't explain it
we've only got a few days
use your imagination
use my imagination?
nand i'm gonna split
you dragged me out the basenwith some killers after us take menhalfway around the world
ntell me why
nobody told menwhy johnny had to die
what is it with you?
who the hell is johnny?
i'm your partner
nwho can you trust?
nobody but me
nobody but you?
ni was there
i'm in the middle of nowherenbecause of you!
i need to use the rest roomni got no toilet tissue
i got metal on my hands!
you wish
i told you these arms were goodnfor something
thanks
i owe you one
i don't know how much longerni can take this
you look good in mud
you do
i got to find a river
we better roll
they don't use parachutes
i have comento the eternal palace because your sacred rulesnhave been broken
shao-kahn has invaded the earth
nyou are granted three questions
why was this treachery allowed?
we do not control man's destiny
everyone can change their fate
you'll stand by and watchnthe ruination of earth?
you are correct
kitana is the keynto closing kahn's portals
if i reunite her with sindel how can i be sure kahn's portalsnwill stay closed?
only when shao-kahn is destroyednwill the future be safe
do you believe the humansnare worth saving?
more than anything i know
do you love them enoughnto sacrifice your immortality?
nmailboxes
which temple's the elder gods'?
keep moving
you know this dude?
is that jax?
who is she?
this is sonya blade
major jackson briggs
you've got incredible legsnfor kicking
where kitana?
she was kidnapped by scorpion
you lost kitananand picked up her?
she helped me get here
nwe got kahn's squads on us
can i make a suggestion?
nlike staying alive
either
we're just gonna waitnfor this dude?
it's hopeless
never give up hope
at least not so early
it's a new look
who's she?
can she fightnas good as she looks?
better because i was expectingna team of fighters
i hear fightersnat war with each other
give us a breaknwe've been through hell
nyou've been through nothing
where's kitana?
kahn took hernit's all my fault
this is not about blame
we're together in this like a family
what's with your arms?
nand you're dissin' me already?
i mean no disrespect
you have real skills
those arms aren't your strengthnthey're your weakness
thanks for the tip
these thingsnare state of the art
faith in yourselfnis all you need
i say that to all of you
i'll try to open a portalnto outworld
follow me!
my powers are leaving me
nmoses parting the red sea?
destroy everything!
whenever you're ready
come on
that was fun
they have taken the baitnand fallen into our trap
proceed as planned
i will await your arrivalnin outworld
nbut i'm freezing inside
feels like i got microwaved
you never get used to that
is that what i think it is?
the realms are merging
this will continue unlessnkahn's portals are closed
time is against us
people in their carsntorn between realms
it's like a nightmare
we have to stop this
nwe must rescue kitana
i know kahn took kitananto his fortress
hold up kahn?
you mean mr bad attitude?
you want to check out his crib?
no way
i ain't goingnon no suicide mission
jax is right
that's probablynwhat kahn wants us to do
there is a secret passageway
i used it to escape
how could you believenthe ruination of the temple would not jeopardize our plan?
it was necessarynto convince the mortals their only hope lie in outworld
you seem confident that sindelnwill capture them in your trap on my soul
all the millenniums of planningnwill be rewarded
you will be proud
know this
i will take your soul myselfnif you fail
i will rallynthe extermination squads and prepare for victory
the mergernwill soon be complete
all your friends will be dead
this must have been edenia
the royal family's temple
kitana said i'd find it here
she's having a bad hair day
they must have followed us
but it may bena blessing in disguise
we need sindelnto close kahn's portals forever
i'll take care of herni'll rescue kitana
something finally went rightnwe won
who finished off sindel?
ni surprised her from behind
maybe she came in handynafter all
you are witness to the dawningnof mankind's final day!
the two realms will be one!
rayden and his mortalsnhave fallen for my trick and failed to stop us
bring rayden and his mortalsnto bow at my feet
nthey can witness the birth of the greatest armynin existence!
it's a trap leave!
up there!
the date's over
only your love can reunite her body and soul
kitana your love can break the holdnkahn has over your mother and close his portals to earth
i have prayed for the day when our love will bring us together again
i have never loved you
nwhat reason was there to love?
i knew it could not be true
it cannot be
but it can and it is
and you are powerless
thunder god
it's over
you fools
you've been tricked
the legend was a lie
kahn's portals stay open
now the mergernis nearly complete
how could you do this?
it was so easy
jade
that's it man
and what happens?
you take usnon a wild goose chase
i don't understand
you were advisednby the other gods
the gods must've lied to me
forget your gods and immortals and all that junk!
the only ones we can trustnfrom here on out are humans not even rayden
don't you understand?
nhe is mortal now like you
all his powersnhave been sacrificed
that's even worse
how do we stop kahn now?
there's more to this than kahn then kahnnhas a higher allegiance
wait a second
that tattooni've seen it before
on a robot and a woman
they both tried to kill me
and both of themnworked for kahn
this tattoo is a family crest bestowed only to my bloodline
it is a permanent mark that allows safe passagenthrough the portals for the bearernand his passengers
did the tattoos you sawnflee the fighter upon death?
like a bat out of hell
temporary passes
the did not share my bloodline
but if it's your family crest too?
my father is an elder god
and only they can bestownsuch a marking
your dad's an elder god?
funny how you failednto mention that before
if your father's an elder god what does that make kahn?
shao-kahn is my brother
it was not my fault
i did everything you ordered
it was your jobnto lure them to an ambush
nthen you failed me!
we could nevernhave stopped them alone
listen to her
she speaks the truth
we would've died trying
you
you are already dead!
and you will be soon
you will mount a defensenaround my newest temple
prepare for rayden to makenone last attack
you said raydennwas no longer to be feared
i am to be feared!
if you fail me
i will feednyour rotting corpse to the worms!
your hallowed positionnatop the worm pile appears to be most tenuous
now your failurenwill be my opportunity
you gotnone dysfunctional family
nmy father decreed his heir to the family thronenmust be strong enough to kill his own brothernin battle if necessary
i beat my brother but i could not kill him
only one thing is certain
kahn must die
this time you'll kill him
i could not then
i cannot now
so what do we do?
you will do your best
it is all that can be expected
i will pray for you all
listen to me
liu is our only hope
i want to fight kahn but i may not be ready
you must believe in yourself
we believe in you
my home
the templenof the order of light
your family
there's so little time left
whatever time we have we must use well
are we really ready to die here?
if we die we will die in battle
together
prepare for final battle!
son the mergernof realms will be complete you alonenhave the power to end this
stop!
i do not want to remember younthis weak!
it is not weak to value life!
rayden
to rule all realmsnwith your family
they are my family
then you shall die with the restnof your pathetic human race!
finish him!
you should have killed me when you had the chance brother
my brother died a long time ago anyway
i win brother
you cannot die
i am proud to die a mortal
like you
this is the beginningnof the end!
show them the way to oblivion!
mr ed is mine
i'll take my mother
leftovers are fine with me
i'll make you eat that thing
i can't takentoo much more of this
is that all you got?
is that any waynto treat your mother?
my mother's dead
as soon will be her daughter
kahn
pathetic and weak
clearly rayden has molded younin his image
without your weapons you are no match for motaro
help!
i got everything i neednright here!
help!
get off her
sonya
you ok?
ni'm fine huh?
huh?
whatever you are you will livento see the end of kahn to give my mother's soul peace
liu kang
you will fail!
i can feel
now i done seen everything
impressive
you've come prepared
but not good enough
kahn
just like the blood of a mortal
how can this be?
i warned younthere would be consequences for breaking the sacred rules
but i did not expect this
must i do everything for you?
the fate of the universe will be decided as it should be
in mortal kombat
nnor mine!
and i will!
that was the longest weeknof my life
jax
could've been worse
could've been the last weeknof our lives
i guess that's right
what's up with that?
was i dead?
it is only rightnthat shinnok's son be allowed to take his placenin the eternal palace
you've become one of us
liu
you've all made me very proud
i will be watching you so stay out of trouble
and remember be there for one another
subtitles ßy mühàmmáð ü§mâñ
__file_terminal__
hulk:
listen up, team.
it's training time.
that means learning to work together.
yo, hulkites.
you're getting exclusive access to hulk practice.
check out how we make smashing' magic.
one side, jones.
hey.
ugh!
merry christmas, smashers.
troops are only as good as their weapons,
so come and get 'em.
here you go, rookie.
the gamma rocket launcher!
whoa!
don't say i never did nothing for ya.
awesome sauce!
uh, sorry.
safety was off.
heya, skaar.
you like stuff what goes boom, don't ya?
mmm.
red:
the ka-boomerang!
hmm.
and some fancy hand wear for the lady.
the gamma gauntlets!
oh, no.
these are for everyday use.
problem with greenie leading is he's too cautious.
you wanna lead, you do it from the front
like i'm gonna do when i take charge of this unit.
gotta get the troops on my side first, though.
that's why they got the new hardware.
i know red.
he's up to no good.
probably trying to take over the team or some nonsense.
dibs on this!
hey, i was gonna use the gamma blaster!
we got our weapons.
let's do this.
give me that remote, jade jaws.
this is my territory.
i've trained raw recruits into special forces elite.
children, get ready for the hulk smasher 5000.
all right, a-bomb, ball up and hit it low.
skaar, slash it open so she-hulk can get to the controls.
red, take long-range firepow...
i'll just show you how it's done.
skaar throw.
pay attention, fido.
i'll train you.
i'm gonna light this baby up, a-bomb style.
give me that.
hey!
watch and learn, rookie.
so how exactly is this teamwork?
red wants to lead a team.
he just doesn't want anyone else on it.
don't worry.
i'm here to pick up red's pieces.
remind me to slug red when this is over.
you're not gonna one-up me, greenie!
what are ya, a one-man army?
save some for the rest of us, green.
hey, you went all lone wolf.
there's problems out there bigger than tanks, red.
problems you can't handle alone.
red:
i can handle anything.
whoa.
whoa, whoa, whoa.
hey now.
earthquake?
what is it?
a planet.
and it's coming this way.
quick, everybody on the elevator.
is the end near?
if you're like me and eyeing the sky,
you're seeing a hunk of extinction-sized rock
racing into our zip code.
the uniforms at s.h.i.e.l.d. are saying there's nothing to worry about,
and this reporter hopes...
these earthquakes will only get worse
as the planetoid gets closer.
even if it misses, it'll still tear earth apart.
planet evil.
so how do we stop it?
put up a detour sign?
hulk:
we need to get a closer look.
everyone into the jump jet.
no need, green.
i'll do this myself and be back by supper time.
all right, i let you take her out,
but you're in my pilot's chair, buddy.
i called shotgun for you, shulkie.
sit back, relax, and i'll get us out to that rock in no time.
look, i'm as excited to punch a planet as the next hulk, but...
but nothing.
i've done this a thousand times, greenie.
i'm gonna go ahead and doubt you've ever punched a planet.
let's see what the professional
planet smasher has in mind.
seatbacks and tray tables in the upright position!
ha ha!
first rule of being in charge,
be better than the green-grilled noobs you're bossing around.
good leader does everybody's job better.
i told fury we're taking the first shot.
i figure if we target the planet's poles
we can knock it off course.
off course?
ha!
i'm blowing that mud ball to smithereens.
hulk:
nice going, red.
maybe you could just yell at it next time.
um, guys?
this is weird.
the planet's gravity is doubling.
and we're being sucked right into it.
what is that?
is it just me, or does that planet
kinda look like a dude?
who dares disturb ego?
it's a living planet!
who speaks perfect english.
does anybody else think that's weird?
insects.
you have incited ego's wrath.
know you're in trouble when you tick off a planet with a face.
ugly planet eat us?
kinda lookin' that way.
a-bomb:
hulk, if you've got a plan,
now's the time to share.
hulk:
your one-man show is over.
hey!
it's a mutiny, is what it is.
firing all thrusters.
we're breaking free!
a-bomb:
uh, we're going the wrong way.
hulk:
gravity's too strong!
astronaut 1:
this is salvation one.
we've lost our visual on the agents of s.m.a.s.h. over.
mission control:
copy that.
move into orbit and stand by.
astronaut 2:
sorry, hulks.
you're on your own.
she-hulk:
is that, ugh, hair?
oh, sick, dude.
he's got massive beard tendrils.
we're not getting taken out by some planet's scruffy beard.
everybody, to your fighters.
stand down, greenie.
i haven't given that...
why do i get the caboose, huh?
skaar:
skaar shave.
skaar, look out.
we've lost skaar.
we're turning around.
what?
we're all going after dog boy?
i'm hit.
going down.
we're all going down.
if we do, the earth is finished.
great.
there goes our ride home.
all right, ya floating ball of ugly.
you and me.
right here.
right now.
ego has graced this galaxy with his numinous presence,
absorbing planets to increase his size.
see that big, blue orb up there?
that's our planet, earth.
you're about to wreck the place.
and endanger billions of lives, you jerk.
ego:
specks of dust.
you mean nothing to ego.
all you have gained is a clear view
of the destruction of your world.
what are you doing?
i had that rocky jerk right where i wanted him.
i don't know who has the bigger ego,
you or the planet named ego.
ego may be bigger,
but we still got him outnumbered five to one.
we need to stick together, change his mind.
change mind?
maybe smash brain.
from the mouths of barbarians.
red:
if we want to get to its brain,
we go through schnoz mountain over there.
hulk:
we won't get far jumping.
gravity's too strong.
we walk from here.
you couldn't lead your butt
out of a pair of purple shorts.
follow me!
being a leader isn't about being best at everything.
it's about knowing the strengths of your teammates.
red:
ha, you see that, hulky?
i got us halfway to the mountain
safe and sound.
ah, water.
so thirsty.
yuck.
it's slimy.
ugh!
oh!
it's drool!
oh, i put it in my mouth.
oh, it's chunky.
i can still taste it on my tongue.
ugh!
wait, if this is drool,
then we're standing right over ego's... mouth?
oh, you gotta be...
a-bomb:
oh, can it get any worse?
ugh.
his breath is even worse than yours, red.
hope you get swallowed.
ego:
now you shall all be devoured!
a-bomb, go!
oh!
uh!
and we're trapped.
and cue the hideous, giant, alien tongue.
she-hulk:
hulk!
feel that, ego?
skaar make holes in teeth!
rick, roll us a path out of here.
yeah!
dr. mouthbomb reporting for surgery.
mama always said i'd make a great dentist.
hey.
follow me.
i'm leading this cavity cavalry.
a-bomb:
that's kinda impressive on a superhero resume...
fought giant teeth the size of the stark tower.
ugh.
more drool?
can it get any more disgusting?
just wait till we get to the nose.
yuck.
big head planet has bad skin.
ugh.
acid!
twenty foot acid zits
with the pus and
giant whiteheads.
ah!
waste your time on zits.
i'm heading to the nose.
yeah.
red, get back here!
and i thought i had acne back in high school.
skaar, make with the boom.
epic win, skaar.
way to... pop those zits.
come on.
we're getting closer to the earth by the second.
uh, as usual, greenie's bunch is lagging behind,
so it's up to me, once again, to get the job done.
moving out.
ugh!
no green tag-alongs or slimy snot-ridden booger delta's
gonna detain general thunderbolt ross.
no siree.
gotta, ugh, make it,
gah, to brain.
wow.
i got a message from our fans.
oh.
hulk, you better see this.
can't take much more of these gravity quakes.
if you haven't signed your will, better get on it.
turns out the end is near.
we gotta stop ego.
now.
gonna take more than a mountain of mucus
to halt this charge.
out of the way, nose goblin!
burn, you buggers!
burn!
come at me.
uh!
hold on.
your pitiful blue orb is soon to be decimated.
each and every lowly life form extinguished.
such is my will.
the will of ego!
never been trash-talked by a planet before.
would dish some back, but i need to save my breath.
in the sky you're seeing a hunk of extinction-sized rock
racing into our zip code.
ah!
she-hulk:
skaar!
huh?
ah!
oh!
i'm gonna have booger breath for a month.
she-hulk:
tell me about it.
wait.
what happened to hulk?
astronaut 1:
negative, control.
still no sign of the hulks.
astronaut 2:
wait a minute.
what is that?
astronaut 1:
it's him.
astronaut 2:
what's he doing out here?
got it.
three, two, one...
hulk away.
that's gonna leave a mark.
it's official.
i'm mad.
hoof it, hulks.
we're running out of time.
she-hulk:
well, look where the lone wolf cowboy landed.
red.
slimed.
can we pick him up on the way back?
like it or not, he's one of us.
agents of s.m.a.s.h. look out for each other, jen.
spoken like a true superhero.
what are you goons doing here?
i got this.
seriously?
yeah.
i'll show you all.
ah!
can't do everything, red.
and i'm done watching you try while the team gets hurt.
okay, so what's your big plan?
only way to the brain is through the sinuses.
but it's closed up.
skaar:
hulk smash nose hole?
hulk:
not quite.
but this time we do it together.
come on, hulks.
yank this nose hair.
this is stupid.
you're gonna get us all snot-rocketed
when he sneezes again.
red, hurry!
grab on.
yeah.
can't sneeze without opening the sinuses.
gesundheit.
okay, mega sneeze avoided.
now what?
the fun part.
we keep smashing.
ego:
you are stepping on the biggest brain
in the known universe.
the greatest mind in all of reality.
you go no further!
shiny.
that's two you owe me, red.
bow down to ego and your end will be swift.
never!
after you, fearless leader.
whoa!
ha!
whoo-hoo-hoo!
whoa!
bouncy.
look away, insects.
i command you.
keep away from me.
yep.
it's the dudes with the biggest egos
that are usually the biggest pinheads.
that's what he was all along?
a tiny ego inside a giant planet head?
wouldn't you know?
you two have a lot in common.
ugh!
yes, red monster,
you are powerful like ego.
join ego and we shall rule the universe.
put a sock in it, squeaky.
i learned my lesson.
there's no "i" in the agents of s.m.a.s.h.
stay back.
help me.
ah!
you got two choices.
a, you get us back to earth
and leave our galaxy forever.
or, b, we slam-dunk you into the sun.
what'll it be?
uh...
ego submits.
great.
uh, so how do we get home?
i think i can get us a ride.
skaar:
bad planet goes away.
she-hulk:
and not a minute too soon.
looks like you hulks saved the day.
spider-man's plot has failed.
the planetoid has missed the earth.
ah.
guess we can thank chance for this one.
i can't believe we're not getting credit for this.
hulk:
check your ego at the door.
we did this 'cause it was the right thing,
not to get you a parade.
do i like green?
nah.
but do i respect him?
yeah, okay.
got me there.
hmm.
guess it took a planet to show red
just how big his head is
and us to bring it down to size.
hulk out.
__file_terminal__
hulk:
listen up, team.
it's training time.
that means learning to work together.
yo, hulkites.
you're getting exclusive access to hulk practice.
check out how we make smashing' magic.
one side, jones.
hey.
ugh!
merry christmas, smashers.
troops are only as good as their weapons, so come and get 'em.
here you go, rookie.
the gamma rocket launcher!
whoa!
don't say i never did nothing for ya.
awesome sauce!
uh, sorry.
safety was off.
heya, skaar.
you like stuff what goes boom, don't ya?
mmm.
red:
the ka-boomerang!
hmm.
and some fancy hand wear for the lady.
the gamma gauntlets!
oh, no.
these are for everyday use.
problem with greenie leading is, he's too cautious.
you wanna lead, you do it from the front like i'm gonna do when i take charge of this unit.
gotta get the troops on my side first, though.
that's why they got the new hardware.
i know red.
he's up to no good.
probably trying to take over the team or some nonsense.
dibs on this!
hey, i was gonna use the gamma blaster!
we got our weapons.
let's do this.
give me that remote, jade jaws.
this is my territory.
i've trained raw recruits into special forces elite.
children, get ready for the hulk smasher 5000.
all right, a-bomb, ball up and hit it low.
skaar, slash it open so she-hulk can get to the controls.
red, take long-range firepow...
i'll just show you how it's done.
skaar throw.
pay attention, fido.
i'll train you.
i'm gonna light this baby up, a-bomb style.
give me that.
hey!
watch and learn, rookie.
so, how exactly is this teamwork?
red wants to lead a team.
he just...
doesn't want anyone else on it.
don't worry.
i'm here to pick up red's pieces.
remind me to slug red when this is over.
you're not gonna one-up me, greenie!
what are ya, a one-man army?
save some for the rest of us, green.
hey, you went all lone wolf.
there's problems out there bigger than tanks, red.
problems you can't handle alone.
red:
i can handle anything.
whoa.
whoa, whoa, whoa.
hey now.
earthquake?
what is it?
a planet.
and it's coming this way.
hulk and the agents of s.m.a.s.h. 01x05
all about ego
quick, everybody on the elevator.
is the end near?
if you're like me and eyeing the sky, you're seeing a hunk of extinction-sized rock racing into our zip code.
the uniforms at s.h.i.e.l.d. are saying there's nothing to worry about,
and this reporter hopes...
these earthquakes will only get worse as the planetoid gets closer.
even if it misses, it'll still tear earth apart.
planet evil.
so how do we stop it?
put up a detour sign?
hulk:
we need to get a closer look.
everyone into the jump jet.
no need, green.
i'll do this myself and be back by supper time.
all right, i let you take her out, but you're in my pilot's chair, buddy.
i called shotgun for you, shulkie.
sit back, relax, and i'll get us out to that rock in no time.
look, i'm as excited to punch a planet as the next hulk, but...
but nothing.
i've done this a thousand times, greenie.
i'm gonna go ahead and doubt you've ever punched a planet.
let's see what the professional planet smasher has in mind.
seatbacks and tray tables in the upright position!
ha ha!
first rule of being in charge, be better than the green-grilled noobs you're bossing around.
good leader does everybody's job better.
i told fury we're taking the first shot.
i figure if we target the planet's poles we can knock it off course.
off course?
ha!
i'm blowing that mud-ball to smithereens.
hulk:
nice going, red.
maybe you could just yell at it next time.
um, guys?
this is weird.
the planet's gravity is doubling.
and we're being sucked right into it.
what is that?
is it just me, or does that planet kinda look like a dude?
who dares disturb ego?
it's... a...
living... planet!
who speaks perfect english.
does anybody else think that's weird?
insects.
you have incited ego's wrath.
know you're in trouble when you tick off a planet with a face.
ugly planet eat us?
kinda lookin' that way.
a-bomb:
hulk, if you've got a plan, now's the time to share.
hulk:
your one-man show is over.
hey!
it's a mutiny, is what it is.
firing all thrusters.
we're breaking free!
a-bomb:
uh, we're going the wrong way.
gravity's too strong!
astronaut 1:
this is salvation one.
we've lost our visual on the agents of s.m.a.s.h. over.
mission control:
copy that.
move into orbit and stand by.
astronaut 2:
sorry, hulks.
you're on your own.
she-hulk:
is that, ugh, hair?
oh, sick, dude.
he's got massive beard tendrils.
we're not getting taken out by some planet's scruffy beard.
everybody, to your fighters.
stand down, greenie.
i haven't given that...
why do i get the caboose, huh?
skaar:
skaar shave.
skaar, look out.
we've lost skaar.
we're turning around.
what?
we're all going after dog boy?
i'm hit.
going down.
we're all going down.
if we do, the earth is finished.
great.
there goes our ride home.
all right, ya floating ball of ugly.
you and me.
right here.
right now.
ego has graced this galaxy with his numinous presence, absorbing planets to increase his size.
see that big, blue orb up there?
that's our planet, earth.
you're about to wreck the place.
and endanger billions of lives, you jerk.
ego:
specks of dust.
you mean nothing to ego.
all you have gained is a clear view of the destruction of your world.
what are you doing?
i had that rocky jerk right where i wanted him.
i don't know who has the bigger ego, you or the planet named ego.
ego may be bigger, but we still got him outnumbered five to one.
we need to stick together, change his mind.
change mind?
maybe...
smash brain.
from the mouths of barbarians.
red:
if we want to get to its brain, we go through schnoz mountain over there.
hulk:
we won't get far jumping.
gravity's too strong.
we walk from here.
you couldn't lead your butt out of a pair of purple shorts.
follow me!
being a leader isn't about being best at everything.
it's about knowing the strengths of your teammates.
red:
ha, you see that, hulky?
i got us halfway to the mountain, safe and sound.
ah, water.
so thirsty.
yuck.
it's slimy.
ugh!
oh!
it's drool!
oh, i put it in my mouth.
oh, it's chunky.
i can still taste it on my tongue.
ugh!
wait, if this is drool, then we're standing right over ego's...
mouth?
oh, you gotta be...
a-bomb:
oh, can it get any worse?
ugh.
his breath is even worse than yours, red.
hope you get swallowed.
ego:
now you shall all be devoured!
a-bomb, go!
oh!
uh!
and...
we're trapped.
and cue the hideous, giant, alien tongue.
she-hulk:
hulk!
feel that, ego?
skaar make holes in teeth!
rick, roll us a path out of here.
yeah!
dr. mouthbomb reporting for surgery.
mama always said i'd make a great dentist.
hey.
follow me.
i'm leading this cavity cavalry.
a-bomb:
that's kinda impressive on a superhero resume...
fought giant teeth the size of the stark tower.
ugh.
more drool?
can it get any more disgusting?
just wait till we get to the nose.
yuck.
big head planet has bad skin.
ugh.
acid!
twenty foot acid zits with the pus and... giant whiteheads.
ah!
waste your time on zits.
i'm heading to the nose.
yeah.
red, get back here!
and i thought i had acne back in high school.
skaar, make with the boom.
epic win, skaar.
way to... pop those zits.
come on.
we're getting closer to the earth by the second.
uh, as usual, greenie's bunch is lagging behind, so it's up to me, once again, to get the job done.
moving out.
ugh!
no green tag-alongs or slimy snot-ridden booger delta's gonna detain general thunderbolt ross.
no siree.
gotta, ugh, make it, gah, to brain.
wow.
i got a message from our fans.
oh.
hulk, you better see this.
can't take much more of these gravity quakes.
if you haven't signed your will, better get on it.
turns out the end is near.
we gotta stop ego.
now.
gonna take more than a mountain of mucus to halt this charge.
out of the way, nose goblin!
burn, you buggers!
burn!
come at me.
uh!
hold on.
your pitiful blue orb is soon to be decimated.
each and every lowly life form extinguished.
such is my will.
the will of ego!
never been trash-talked by a planet before.
would dish some back, but i need to save my breath.
in the sky you're seeing a hunk of extinction-sized rock racing into our zip code.
ah!
she-hulk:
skaar!
huh?
ah!
oh!
i'm gonna have booger breath for a month.
she-hulk:
tell me about it.
wait.
what happened to hulk?
astronaut 1:
negative, control.
still no sign of the hulks.
astronaut 2:
wait a minute.
what is that?
astronaut 1:
it's him.
astronaut 2:
what's he doing out here?
got it.
three, two, one...
hulk away.
that's gonna leave a mark.
it's official.
i'm mad.
hoof it, hulks.
we're running out of time.
she-hulk:
well, look where the lone wolf cowboy landed.
red.
slimed.
can we pick him up on the way back?
like it or not, he's one of us.
agents of s.m.a.s.h. look out for each other, jen.
spoken like a true superhero.
what are you goons doing here?
i got this.
seriously?
yeah.
i'll show you all.
ah!
can't do everything, red.
and i'm done watching you try while the team gets hurt.
okay, so what's your big plan?
only way to the brain is through the sinuses.
but it's closed up.
skaar:
hulk smash nose hole?
hulk:
not quite.
but this time, we do it together.
come on, hulks.
yank this nose hair.
this is stupid.
you're gonna get us all snot-rocketed when he sneezes again.
red, hurry!
grab on.
yeah.
can't sneeze without opening the sinuses.
gesundheit.
okay, mega sneeze avoided.
now what?
the fun part.
we keep smashing.
ego:
you are stepping on the biggest brain in the known universe.
the greatest mind in all of reality.
you go no further!
shiny.
that's two you owe me, red.
bow down to ego and your end will be swift.
never!
after you, fearless leader.
whoa!
ha!
whoo-hoo-hoo!
whoa!
bouncy.
look away, insects.
i command you.
keep away from me.
yep.
it's the dudes with the biggest egos that are usually the biggest pinheads.
that's what he was all along?
a tiny ego inside a giant planet head?
wouldn't you know?
you two have a lot in common.
ugh!
yes, red monster, you are powerful like ego.
join ego and we shall rule the universe.
put a sock in it, squeaky.
i learned my lesson.
there's no "i" in the agents of s.m.a.s.h.
stay back.
help me.
ah!
you got two choices.
a, you get us back to earth and leave our galaxy forever.
or, b, we slam-dunk you into the sun.
what'll it be?
uh...
ego submits.
great.
uh, so how do we get home?
i think i can get us a ride.
skaar:
bad planet goes away.
she-hulk:
and not a minute too soon.
looks like you hulks saved the day.
spider-man's plot has failed.
the planetoid has missed the earth.
ah.
guess we can thank chance for this one.
i can't believe we're not getting credit for this.
hulk:
check your ego at the door.
we did this 'cause it was the right thing, not to get you a parade.
do i like green?
nah.
but do i respect him?
yeah, okay.
got me there.
hmm.
guess it took a planet to show red just how big his head is and us to bring it down to size.
hulk out.
__file_terminal__
previously on siberia...
a tiger!
a fucking tiger!
i couldn't believe it.
it was like something a seven year old would tell me...
oh, i saw a tiger in the woods...
what are you doing?
wondering what would do that to a tiger.
oh, hell.
it's on fire...
and it's green...
what's on fire?
the sky.
you know, there's something about carolina.
i feel like i recognize her.
fire in the woods, man.
got to get some water.
i told you this was a mistake!
that's all we had, man.
that's all we had.
does anyone recognize this?
we found johnny's shirt.
and it was full of food from the shed.
i get what it looks like.
i see that.
but i didn't steal the food, and i didn't burn down the shed.
someone obviously doesn't like me, and they're trying to set me up.
people weren't taking too kindly me being at camp 'cause apparently i stole food from the shed and then burned it down.
someone framed me.
they wrapped my shirt around some food, hid it in the woods.
i don't know who did it.
you know, frankly, i don't really care anymore, you know?
i don't really need them anyways.
you know, obviously, i can take care of myself.
took them how long to build a fire?
i did it in five minutes in the dark.
i can't believe
johnny's gonna just stay out in the woods.
that's crazy.
and why shouldn't he?
after all the crap that he's pulled?
he'll be fine.
and if he's not, you got a better chance of winning.
and you can keep his bed.
i want to make it to the end, but i want to do it as a team, kind of like how neeko's doing it, you know?
can i tell you something?
sure.
you're a smart guy.
you know that neeko is a professional athlete?
he plays game for living.
how about maybe he's playing this game that he's a very nice guy, everybody trusts him, just to win the game?
have you ever thought about it?
i don't think you should trust him.
can't trust anybody.
guys?
i get up early, and as soon as i open the door,
i practically ran into this spear that's stuck in the ground.
it felt like a threat.
let me see.
what does it say?
it says...
what is that?
it means "get out.
it's just another thing to throw on the pile of what the hell's going on here.
it's a nice prop.
look at it.
it's not real.
nice scare tactic.
they're watching.
i'm sure they're loving this.
why is it in front of our cabin and not yours?
who wants you guys to get out?
well, this is here on purpose.
that's for sure.
it's here on purpose.
it's here for a reason.
you guys gonna be so gullible to fall for this, really?
who else could've left that spear?
besides production, who could've done it?
we're the only people out here.
aren't we?
are you okay?
i'm fine.
i mean, aren't you still scared?
the spear this morning telling us to leave?
that doesn't scare you at all?
i think, at this point, it's just all mind games.
i miss home.
i miss my family.
i even miss my stupid ex-boyfriend.
this place is-- it's getting to me.
i don't know.
i'm thinking about pushing the button.
i don't want you to go.
you know what i mean?
i think-- i think we can win this.
we just need to
but i don't need to stay.
i don't understand why i'm even staying.
i don't need the money that badly.
i do.
annie.
i've been a lone wolf for a while, you know?
i've been on my own for a while.
i'm probably, without knowing it, less lonely than i have been in a long time because i'm interacting with people more often than i have in many years.
now i consider daniel a friend.
he's a good kid.
if i had a son, i'd be proud if he was like daniel.
what are you looking at?
just watching those two.
mm-hmm.
i don't want to overstep my bounds, you know.
i don't know how she feels about me, and so i'm just kind of
i'm taking it slow, but at the same time, it's really hard 'cause i really want to, you know, see where this is gonna go.
i don't know.
at the same time, i don't want to get hurt.
don't worry.
she knows you exist.
how would i really get her to?
i don't know, like...
get her to what?
like me like me.
you can't get her to like you.
either she does or she doesn't.
you know?
how beautiful is it?
this is so nice.
why not?
i'm sorry.
i'm being naughty.
it's beautiful in, though.
you must be hot.
come on.
no one's here.
it's trouble.
no one's here.
i'm not gonna tell anyone.
you want to come.
oh, yeah?
no good... _
you'll thank me once you're in here.
it's beautiful.
careful.
i'm gonna film us.
it's a great idea.
you promise you'll erase it?
promise me?
i promise.
good.
annie?
wait, annie.
you shouldn't be walking out here alone.
it's not safe.
what are you talking about?
come on, it's not safe.
stop.
wait.
don't be like this.
be like what?
look, i
it's not the same thing for me, okay?
i'm not going back to a life or a job that i like or family or friends or even an ex-boyfriend, and i get that you're sad about that.
but you're forgetting about who's here for you right now, and you're turning your back on me.
no, i'm not.
i like her.
it's been a while since i've been with anybody, but i
we get along so well.
i just feel like a dumbass now.
i mean, she's probably not gonna talk to me for the rest of the time, if she does stay.
hey.
there you are.
how's it going?
good.
i just wanted to talk to you.
uh-huh?
um, so, victoria's gone.
um, i'm just wondering what's going on with her bed.
oh, it's-- well, it's free right now.
so no one would mind if i moved in?
um... yeah, yeah.
i mean, i don't mind.
i don't know what the other girls other think, but it's good with me.
awesome.
all right, i'll go grab my things.
it's not that i didn't have fun with the boys.
i don't know.
i just feel like my time there is done.
it's served its purpose, and i want to
i want to get to know the girls a bit better.
hey.
what are you doing?
i'm leaving.
you mean the show?
no, you idiot.
i'm gonna move into victoria's old bed.
wait.
why?
because it's free.
i know, but i thought you liked it here with me.
you said we are great roommates.
yes, we were, and thank you for letting me stay.
just, i don't know.
i want to be with the girls now.
come on, esther.
don't you think we should team up?
we are both smarter than everyone else here.
we can win this thing-- together.
ohh, i like your style.
i will think about it.
but hold on.
hold on.
i was just thinking that we could have something...
you thought what?
that we could get romantic a little bit?
don't laugh.
really?
i don't do romance.
look, we're playing a game.
what do you mean?
i'm playing a game-- for money.
i don't do romance, and i'm not playing a dating game.
i'm sorry.
fuck you, bitch!
you're not going anywhere.
get the fuck off me!
i'm kidding.
i was just kidding, esther.
i'm just kidding.
esther.
don't you fucking touch me again.
come on!
i'm just
i was just kidding!
i think i was in shock.
i-i don't know.
it happened so quickly.
but he grabbed me here, pushed me up against the bunk, and then he backed off.
esther is a player.
we all know that.
and i played with her, too.
so she was on the way out.
i just pushed her a little bit on the bed, just jokingly, like pretending that i'm like scaring her.
you're gonna stay here," or something.
she just, like, freaked out.
she pushed me away.
she's like, "don't talk to me like that.
stormed out, like mad.
and i was just telling her, "i'm joking.
you know me.
i always joke around.
i was just joking with you.
i didn't get it, seriously.
she just freaked out, and it was just a pure joke.
what are you showing me?
it was right here.
are you sure?
big huge carcass.
guts hanging out and everything.
look.
look at what?
the blood?
it could've been anything.
it could've been a bird.
it could've been a deer.
why would i make this up?
why would i lie?
there was a huge-- there was a huge tiger there.
i guess they took it.
the producers took it.
the producers?
i think she thinks that i could've been trying to scare her, play a sick joke on her.
i was kind of a bit shocked because i didn't think she saw me as that kind of person.
for all i know, johnny took it.
johnny took it?
he probably dragged it off into there and hid it or something.
i don't know.
oh, now johnny does everything?
not only do we have to worry about the producers playing mind games with us, we got to worry about that guy.
hopefully he's done us all a favor and gone and pushed the button to get out of here.
i don't think he's as bad as you think.
why are you always defending him?
i'm telling you that guy's dangerous.
you need to watch yourself!
i'm kind of baffled where it's gone, you know, 'cause this thing was pretty big, you know.
it would've taken a lot of force or something pretty hefty to get it out of there, and there was no trail.
there was no kind of like a trail of where it could've been dragged to.
it's like it was almost picked up and gone.
got some traps set up along this way somewhere.
i found some deer trails i scouted earlier.
hope they catch something.
the first night in the woods by myself was pretty awesome, actually.
had a nice little fire.
weather was nice.
you know, wrapped up.
it was nice being on my own.
it's what i wanted to do originally, too, is, you know, be by myself, take care of myself, do my own thing, and i got that, so pretty content.
what the hell did this, man?
this thing's...
i mean, it, obviously, it ripped the deer while it was standing here.
it was strong enough to rip it off-- rip the, like, rip its bone in half.
what do you want?
what are you doing?
i'm trying to catch some food, but something got to it before me, it looks like.
what do you want?
i just came to try to convince you to come back.
try to convince me to come back, to the camp?
yeah, i don't think it's safe for you to be out here.
i think it's safer here than being back at camp where a bunch of people don't like me thanks to you, making those wild accusations.
just, whatever happened,
i don't think it's safe for you to stay out here.
well, you know what?
i really don't need you trying to be nice to me.
i'll be fine on my own, okay?
i can take care of myself.
y'all try taking care of yourselves, too, all right?
okay, fine.
if that's how you want to be, then fine.
fine.
nah, that's-- that's not good enough.
that ain't good enough.
hey, irene.
hey, dan.
whatcha doing?
collecting some acorns.
oh.
yeah.
if you mash them up, you can make like a paste and make a pancake out of it.
really?
yeah.
is it-- does it taste good?
i think so.
you want me to help?
oh, sure.
that'd be great.
yeah.
they're kind of scattered all over.
daniel is a really, really nice, really sweet person, and he has such a gentle-- a very gentle spirit,
i guess you can say.
hey.
it's a siberian squill.
i'm not really big on flowers.
why not?
well, you know, they're pretty, but it's kind of odd, the whole idea of someone giving someone a flower 'cause it's like, "oh, you know, i like you, so let me give you something that's dying.
it never really made sense to me.
something more permanent would be nice, you know, even a rock would be better.
she's got so much complexity to her, you know?
i find out something new about her every day, it seems like, and it's a pretty big thing that i would've never expected out of her.
it's...
she's just-- she's amazing.
where are we?
i can't find the path.
we're lost.
we're not lost.
no, we're lost.
i don't know where we're going.
in the middle of the wood, very close to the river,
i found this really weird-looking tree.
i mean, it wasn't a tree.
it was something different.
it had a face shape.
it had hair.
what?
my name is miljan.
it's really nice to meet you.
what is your name?
ogdee?
this is my friend ogdee.
we go way back, man.
he's so bad.
i spoke to it.
we had a little conversation.
ogdee is my old friend from high school.
i'm kidding.
esther.
what?
hey.
where have you been?
out.
out?
where do you go all day, anyway?
okay.
i can't believe you got us so lost.
we're not lost.
yes, we are.
where are we?
do you know where we are?
we're in siberia.
not funny.
oh, god!
what is that?
did you hear that?
i heard it.
come on.
there might be something out here.
come on.
oh!
oh, god!
what are you doing out here?
sorry.
i'm going to get water.
where are you going?
home-- where the hell is it?
that way.
why is she being such a bitch?
why are you here, by the way, alone?
no reason.
uh-huh.
that's suspicious.
shut up, miljan.
guys, have you seen carolina?
no.
she hasn't come back.
you mean she's not back yet?
she's not back.
i have no idea where she is.
i haven't seen her.
you do know she's out there with johnny?
yeah, tell me about it.
i know.
well, i don't know about you, but i feel like i should go and look for her.
i don't-- i don't feel comfortable with her with johnny.
before it gets too late, i think we should.
i'm game, yeah.
you're gonna come with me?
yeah.
gentlemen.
where the hell were you?
i was in the woods.
have you seen carolina?
she's out there with johnny.
oh, she'll be fine, guys.
come on.
are you serious?
yes.
they're probably having sex or something.
oh, you're a funny guy.
don't be naive.
you didn't notice the chemistry they had?
hey, guys, listen.
i'm gonna look for her.
i don't know about you.
just sitting here talking.
hey, it's dark outside.
oh, fuck!
get on the bed.
get onto the bed!
the bed?
oh, my god.
what is this?
the cab started shaking...
ran outside, and the sky this just this odd color that i've never seen in my life, and i'm thinking it can't be the show doing this because that's way out of their powers and their control.
what is it?
it's like-- it's like the sky's on fire.
what?
it's like the sky's on fire.
the sky went from dark to light, and it looked like it was on fire, just like victoria said.
if this is all part of the game, it's beyond me at this point.
i don't understand how they could pull it off.
i feel like i'm on another planet.
i feel like i walked into some kind of a dream or a nightmare, and nobody-- nobody has any answers.
i don't have an answer.
i could sit here all day long and just-- it's way above my pay scale.
is it moving?
it just keeps moving.
carolina never came back today, did she?
yeah.
where-- where are they?
she's still in the woods-- the forest.
well, this can't stop us.
we still have to find her.
we can't leave her out there.
we better go now.
we're just gonna go look for her-- me and sam, daniel, miljan as well.
oh, my god.
carolina?
carolina.
are you okay?
what happened?
oh, my god.
carolina!
what happened?
are you okay?
then we see carolina stumbling towards the girls' cabin, and the girls go rushing over to her.
are you hurt somewhere?
what happened?
look at all the blood.
what happened?
she's bleeding.
back up.
guys, don't, don't-- don't go to her.
oh, my god, look at her arm.
look at her arm.
what happened to you?
you're okay.
carolina, what happened?
carolina shows up, and she's battered and disoriented.
she couldn't even speak.
she's trembling.
i don't...
she doesn't remember.
you don't remember?
what do you remember?
she didn't know what was going on.
she was saying she couldn't even, like, remember what she'd been doing out there.
she was just talking nonsense, and it was really jolting to see her come back like that.
you were with john?
and what happened?
where is he?
what were you doing with johnny?
get her some water.
get her some help.
carolina, were you with johnny?
she said she was.
what were you doing with johnny?
she said the name "johnny.
at that point, i just, you know, lost it.
listen to me.
for what?
here, just come here.
come here.
i want to say something to you.
what?
listen to me!
it's important.
you got to make sure.
you look at his hands.
okay.
his hands are a tell-tale sign, okay?
his hands will tell you if he did something.
what are you doing?
where are you going?
stay here with the girls.
stay here with the girls!
i'm not wasting any more time with this guy.
everyone wants to keep him around, thinking,
oh, yeah, he'll turn around and be a good guy.
no, i don't think so.
i'm not gonna lay around waiting for him to come stab me in the back.
she's been through a lot.
yeah.
we're gonna look after you, okay?
don't worry.
we don't know where johnny is.
carolina sort of-- she couldn't say much, but she said that she was-- they were fighting-- her and johnny were fighting.
and then, now she looks like this, so johnny should be probably fearing for his life right now because sam and neeko went after him.
let's just keep moving.
move.
the whole walking through the woods and hearing noises coming from places that, you know
we stop and we look, and there's nothing there.
it's just this whole atmosphere that everything just feels like you're being watched, you know.
whether, you know, whether you're in the woods or in the cabin, you always feel like something is watching you, and the past two nights,
i haven't slept very well, you know.
so i'm just-- you know, you're always looking over your shoulder.
you always think something's there, and, like, the whole thing with the sky now...
i don't know.
well, he's obviously around here somewhere.
yes.
you keep saying "he," "he.
look how thick the brush is here.
if there's somebody around here, we'd see them.
we hear other things.
all of a sudden, something goes flying.
i think we should be talking more in the sense of "what.
i'll go see if the water's boiled.
thank you.
i don't want to die.
i didn't ever expect that that would be a possibility on this show, and every day that i'm here,
i feel like i'm an idiot for staying, that i am gonna end up like tommy.
i don't deal well with-- abuse is not something that...
i can handle right now.
i'm scared.
and johnny was already on the outs with the group for stealing food.
i just-- how could he do that to her?
it didn't make sense.
she's such a nice lady.
johnny.
hey.
what did you do?
huh?
what did you do to carolina?
i don't know what you're talking about.
what do you mean you don't know what i'm talking about?
what'd you do to her?
i didn't
she's all cut up and shit.
i don't
i don't know.
i...
what's wrong with you?
i don't know.
i just
i kind of came to.
i was walking around, and...
i don't know.
i was
i saw her.
you saw her where?
you got to tell me what happened.
we were in the woods, and...
i don't really-- i don't really remember.
i get approached by daniel, and basically started accusing me of hurting carolina.
i didn't know what to say.
what did you to do her?
the last thing she remembers is getting in a fight with you, so you can't come back here and tell me that you didn't touch her!
i don't.
then what happened to her?
i don't know.
that's not a very good answer right now, man.
i don't-- trust me.
that's not a very good answer.
hey.
you hear that?
at the camp.
let's go.
i don't know.
are you serious?
you don't know?
you're such a scumbag.
oh, what?
so she just fell down and ended up that way?
are you kidding me?
i was in a complete haze.
i had no recollection.
i was like blacked out, like i drank too much.
he doesn't look like he knows what's going on.
i don't.
then what happened to her?
i don't know.
you were together, weren't you?
you said that.
shit!
neeko!
guys, he doesn't know!
motherfucker!
come on!
stop it!
stop!
stop it!
come on!
stop it!
neeko, stop it!
he didn't do it!
carolina starts screaming, "it's not him.
he didn't do it.
stop it!
what do you mean?
you said you don't remember.
you're a dead man.
you're a fucking dead man.
listen.
hey, hey.
hey!
calm down.
listen.
what happened?
i don't know.
talk to me.
i don't know.
johnny doesn't know anything?
he doesn't remember anything.
it was just her and him in the forest.
i know that.
i saw it in his eyes, okay?
all i remember is i talked to her.
we were arguing.
and then i-i came here, and i started getting accused, and i don't even know what the fuck is going on.
if we caught him in the woods, he would've been dead.
when i saw that look in his eyes,
i just felt that i needed to take a step back.
remember the way she came into camp?
he's got the same look on his face.
does she remember anything?
show us your hands.
oh, yeah.
i've seen that before.
what's that from?
nothing's making sense here.
and just to be angry and become a bunch of animals
we can't go killing each other.
we're still human beings.
i don't like things that i can't explain and that i don't have at least some sort of control over.
the sky changing color and looking like fire-- the producers, the show can't do that.
we're talking supernatural stuff now.
regardless of everything else, that's real, and that scared the hell out of me.
it seems like everybody at camp was convinced that i was the person that hurt her.
i've never hit a woman in my life.
i don't know why i would.
i don't remember anything, but...
i can't say that i didn't 'cause i don't
i don't know what happened.
but i know in my heart i wouldn't do that.
i don't remember anything.
all i remember is that i was... with
went to get johnny.
he was in the woods.
i found him, and i...
it's all one big blur, like one big blackout.
i have all these marks on my body, and my shirt is broken, and i don't remember.
i don't understand.
so you're telling me this is real.
yes.
it looks like it's native, handmade.
it looks like it's just a prop to me.
well, if it's a prop, it's really well-made 'cause you see the barbs.
they're curved.
that's exactly how it should look.
this is ox.
it's real ox.
and it's balanced for throwing.
it just looks perfect.
it's your choice to believe in it or not, but this is real, so...
i don't have to deal with lies in figuring out what is true, what is not.
i have to know the environment i'm in.
i have to know what's out there in order to protect myself and survive.
look at this.
so, i found this symbol that is really strange.
it has four lines and little triangles on the ends.
then i found another one and another one, and i realized it's a path.
i should follow them.
at the end, it was very close to the settlement.
i found the last one.
and i found this box.
it was a metal box.
i opened it, and it was a book.
i didn't understand anything because it was in a different language.
i would assume it's russian because it's cyrillic letters.
in the middle of me looking at it, somebody was watching at me.
it was a person.
he's staring at me.
and he just disappeared in a second.
so there are people out there.
hey.
i was just gonna try and make things better, and, like, apologize, and just wanted to let her know that i didn't, you know,
i didn't want to screw anything up or make anything awkward for her.
i guess i was in a weird mood, and i just want to apologize because i don't want to make you feel uncomfortable or anything, because i'm really glad you're
when i realized what annie's real feelings were for me,
i just thought...
i'm sort of open to love in any form right now.
so i kissed her.
which i kind of surprised myself at, to be honest.
don't worry about it.
hey.
can i have a seat?
how are you feeling?
i'm okay.
you?
i wanted to go check on her to see how she was doing 'cause i knew she had scratches and stuff on her, and she was sure freaked out like i was.
do you remember anything from last night?
no.
i don't remember a thing.
i don't remember anything either.
but i know you didn't hurt me.
i would never hurt you.
♪ people in life, they will come and go ♪
♪ like the boats sailing by my door ♪
♪ you can be the ocean, you can be the shore ♪
♪ this mystery wind, she will always blow ♪
♪ don't worry, don't worry, dear, no more ♪
♪ and now your message in a bottle ♪
♪ is being tumbled in the beach flies ♪
♪ you can be the lilies in the fields ♪
♪ i'll be the fool ♪
♪ but don't worry, don't worry, dear, no more ♪
♪ trouble in life, it will come and go ♪
can i ask you something, though?
why'd you set me up?
with the shed and the food?
she couldn't even look me in the eye.
and i was like, "well...
i was like, "it tells me all i need to know,
so i was like-- got the hell out of there.
johnny.
stop, please.
johnny, wait for me.
give me a break.
oh, my god.
hey.
i know that.
johnny.
i know that.
you're an actress.
she said, like, this slogan.
like, "i know that.
i know that from somewhere.
and then it just-- the light bulb went off.
yeah, that's like your slogan.
she's that actress from that show that
i'm like, "that's how i know you.
i didn't want to do that.
i didn't want
i asked them.
you didn't want to do what?
i didn't want to burn it down.
i didn't want to set you up.
they told me to.
who's they?
the producers.
so you're-- you're helping the show?
__file_terminal__
previously on siberia...
a tiger!
a fucking tiger!
i couldn't believe it.
it was like something a seven year old would tell me...
oh, i saw a tiger in the woods...
what are you doing?
wondering what would do that to a tiger.
oh, hell.
it's on fire...
and it's green...
what's on fire?
the sky.
you know, there's something about carolina.
i feel like i recognize her.
fire in the woods, man.
got to get some water.
i told you this was a mistake!
that's all we had, man.
that's all we had.
does anyone recognize this?
we found johnny's shirt.
and it was full of food from the shed.
i get what it looks like.
i see that.
but i didn't steal the food, and i didn't burn down the shed.
someone obviously doesn't like me, and they're trying to set me up.
people weren't taking too kindly me being at camp 'cause apparently i stole food from the shed and then burned it down.
someone framed me.
they wrapped my shirt around some food, hid it in the woods.
i don't know who did it.
you know, frankly, i don't really care anymore, you know?
i don't really need them anyways.
you know, obviously, i can take care of myself.
took them how long to build a fire?
i did it in five minutes in the dark.
i can't believe
johnny's gonna just stay out in the woods.
that's crazy.
and why shouldn't he?
after all the crap that he's pulled?
he'll be fine.
and if he's not, you got a better chance of winning.
and you can keep his bed.
i want to make it to the end, but i want to do it as a team, kind of like how neeko's doing it, you know?
can i tell you something?
sure.
you're a smart guy.
you know that neeko is a professional athlete?
he plays game for living.
how about maybe he's playing this game that he's a very nice guy, everybody trusts him, just to win the game?
have you ever thought about it?
i don't think you should trust him.
can't trust anybody.
guys?
i get up early, and as soon as i open the door,
i practically ran into this spear that's stuck in the ground.
it felt like a threat.
let me see.
what does it say?
it says...
what is that?
it means "get out.
it's just another thing to throw on the pile of what the hell's going on here.
it's a nice prop.
look at it.
it's not real.
nice scare tactic.
they're watching.
i'm sure they're loving this.
why is it in front of our cabin and not yours?
who wants you guys to get out?
well, this is here on purpose.
that's for sure.
it's here on purpose.
it's here for a reason.
you guys gonna be so gullible to fall for this, really?
who else could've left that spear?
besides production, who could've done it?
we're the only people out here.
aren't we?
are you okay?
i'm fine.
i mean, aren't you still scared?
the spear this morning telling us to leave?
that doesn't scare you at all?
i think, at this point, it's just all mind games.
i miss home.
i miss my family.
i even miss my stupid ex-boyfriend.
this place is-- it's getting to me.
i don't know.
i'm thinking about pushing the button.
i don't want you to go.
you know what i mean?
i think-- i think we can win this.
we just need to
but i don't need to stay.
i don't understand why i'm even staying.
i don't need the money that badly.
i do.
annie.
i've been a lone wolf for a while, you know?
i've been on my own for a while.
i'm probably, without knowing it, less lonely than i have been in a long time because i'm interacting with people more often than i have in many years.
now i consider daniel a friend.
he's a good kid.
if i had a son, i'd be proud if he was like daniel.
what are you looking at?
just watching those two.
mm-hmm.
i don't want to overstep my bounds, you know.
i don't know how she feels about me, and so i'm just kind of
i'm taking it slow, but at the same time, it's really hard 'cause i really want to, you know, see where this is gonna go.
i don't know.
at the same time, i don't want to get hurt.
don't worry.
she knows you exist.
how would i really get her to?
i don't know, like...
get her to what?
like me like me.
you can't get her to like you.
either she does or she doesn't.
you know?
how beautiful is it?
this is so nice.
why not?
i'm sorry.
i'm being naughty.
it's beautiful in, though.
you must be hot.
come on.
no one's here.
it's trouble.
no one's here.
i'm not gonna tell anyone.
you want to come.
oh, yeah?
no good... _
you'll thank me once you're in here.
it's beautiful.
careful.
i'm gonna film us.
it's a great idea.
you promise you'll erase it?
promise me?
i promise.
good.
annie?
wait, annie.
you shouldn't be walking out here alone.
it's not safe.
what are you talking about?
come on, it's not safe.
stop.
wait.
don't be like this.
be like what?
look, i--
it's not the same thing for me, okay?
i'm not going back to a life or a job that i like or family or friends or even an ex-boyfriend, and i get that you're sad about that.
but you're forgetting about who's here for you right now, and you're turning your back on me.
no, i'm not.
i like her.
it's been a while since i've been with anybody, but i
we get along so well.
i just feel like a dumbass now.
i mean, she's probably not gonna talk to me for the rest of the time, if she does stay.
hey.
there you are.
how's it going?
good.
i just wanted to talk to you.
uh-huh?
um, so, victoria's gone.
um, i'm just wondering what's going on with her bed.
oh, it's-- well, it's free right now.
so no one would mind if i moved in?
um... yeah, yeah.
i mean, i don't mind.
i don't know what the other girls other think, but it's good with me.
awesome.
all right, i'll go grab my things.
it's not that i didn't have fun with the boys.
i don't know.
i just feel like my time there is done.
it's served its purpose, and i want to
i want to get to know the girls a bit better.
hey.
what are you doing?
i'm leaving.
you mean the show?
no, you idiot.
i'm gonna move into victoria's old bed.
wait.
why?
because it's free.
i know, but i thought you liked it here with me.
you said we are great roommates.
yes, we were, and thank you for letting me stay.
just, i don't know.
i want to be with the girls now.
come on, esther.
don't you think we should team up?
we are both smarter than everyone else here.
we can win this thing-- together.
ohh, i like your style.
i will think about it.
but hold on.
hold on.
i was just thinking that we could have something... you thought what?
that we could get romantic a little bit?
don't laugh.
really?
i don't do romance.
look, we're playing a game.
what do you mean?
i'm playing a game-- for money.
i don't do romance, and i'm not playing a dating game.
i'm sorry.
fuck you, bitch!
you're not going anywhere.
get the fuck off me!
i'm kidding.
i was just kidding, esther.
i'm just kidding.
esther.
don't you fucking touch me again.
come on!
i'm just
i was just kidding!
i think i was in shock.
i-i don't know.
it happened so quickly.
but he grabbed me here, pushed me up against the bunk, and then he backed off.
esther is a player.
we all know that.
and i played with her, too.
so she was on the way out.
i just pushed her a little bit on the bed, just jokingly, like pretending that i'm like scaring her.
you're gonna stay here," or something.
she just, like, freaked out.
she pushed me away.
she's like, "don't talk to me like that.
stormed out, like mad.
and i was just telling her, "i'm joking.
you know me.
i always joke around.
i was just joking with you.
i didn't get it, seriously.
she just freaked out, and it was just a pure joke.
what are you showing me?
it was right here.
are you sure?
big huge carcass.
guts hanging out and everything.
look.
look at what?
the blood?
it could've been anything.
it could've been a bird.
it could've been a deer.
why would i make this up?
why would i lie?
there was a huge-- there was a huge tiger there.
i guess they took it.
the producers took it.
the producers?
i think she thinks that i could've been trying to scare her, play a sick joke on her.
i was kind of a bit shocked because i didn't think she saw me as that kind of person.
for all i know, johnny took it.
johnny took it?
he probably dragged it off into there and hid it or something.
i don't know.
oh, now johnny does everything?
not only do we have to worry about the producers playing mind games with us, we got to worry about that guy.
hopefully he's done us all a favor and gone and pushed the button to get out of here.
i don't think he's as bad as you think.
why are you always defending him?
i'm telling you that guy's dangerous.
you need to watch yourself!
i'm kind of baffled where it's gone, you know, 'cause this thing was pretty big, you know.
it would've taken a lot of force or something pretty hefty to get it out of there, and there was no trail.
there was no kind of like a trail of where it could've been dragged to.
it's like it was almost picked up and gone.
got some traps set up along this way somewhere.
i found some deer trails i scouted earlier.
hope they catch something.
the first night in the woods by myself was pretty awesome, actually.
had a nice little fire.
weather was nice.
you know, wrapped up.
it was nice being on my own.
it's what i wanted to do originally, too, is, you know, be by myself, take care of myself, do my own thing, and i got that, so pretty content.
what the hell did this, man?
this thing's...
i mean, it, obviously, it ripped the deer while it was standing here.
it was strong enough to rip it off-- rip the, like, rip its bone in half.
what do you want?
what are you doing?
i'm trying to catch some food, but something got to it before me, it looks like.
what do you want?
i just came to try to convince you to come back.
try to convince me to come back, to the camp?
yeah, i don't think it's safe for you to be out here.
i think it's safer here than being back at camp where a bunch of people don't like me thanks to you, making those wild accusations.
just, whatever happened,
i don't think it's safe for you to stay out here.
well, you know what?
i really don't need you trying to be nice to me.
i'll be fine on my own, okay?
i can take care of myself.
y'all try taking care of yourselves, too, all right?
okay, fine.
if that's how you want to be, then fine.
fine.
nah, that's-- that's not good enough.
that ain't good enough.
hey, irene.
hey, dan.
whatcha doing?
collecting some acorns.
oh.
yeah.
if you mash them up, you can make like a paste and make a pancake out of it.
really?
yeah.
is it-- does it taste good?
i think so.
you want me to help?
oh, sure.
that'd be great.
yeah.
they're kind of scattered all over.
daniel is a really, really nice, really sweet person, and he has such a gentle-- a very gentle spirit,
i guess you can say.
hey.
it's a siberian squill.
i'm not really big on flowers.
why not?
well, you know, they're pretty, but it's kind of odd, the whole idea of someone giving someone a flower 'cause it's like, "oh, you know, i like you, so let me give you something that's dying.
it never really made sense to me.
something more permanent would be nice, you know, even a rock would be better.
she's got so much complexity to her, you know?
i find out something new about her every day, it seems like, and it's a pretty big thing that i would've never expected out of her.
it's...
she's just-- she's amazing.
where are we?
i can't find the path.
we're lost.
we're not lost.
no, we're lost.
i don't know where we're going.
in the middle of the wood, very close to the river,
i found this really weird-looking tree.
i mean, it wasn't a tree.
it was something different.
it had a face shape.
it had hair.
what?
my name is miljan.
it's really nice to meet you.
what is your name?
ogdee?
this is my friend ogdee.
we go way back, man.
he's so bad.
i spoke to it.
we had a little conversation.
ogdee is my old friend from high school.
i'm kidding.
esther.
what?
hey.
where have you been?
out.
out?
where do you go all day, anyway?
okay.
i can't believe you got us so lost.
we're not lost.
yes, we are.
where are we?
do you know where we are?
we're in siberia.
not funny.
oh, god!
what is that?
did you hear that?
i heard it.
come on.
there might be something out here.
come on.
oh!
oh, god!
what are you doing out here?
sorry.
i'm going to get water.
where are you going?
home-- where the hell is it?
that way.
why is she being such a bitch?
why are you here, by the way, alone?
no reason.
uh-huh.
that's suspicious.
shut up, miljan.
guys, have you seen carolina?
no.
she hasn't come back.
you mean she's not back yet?
she's not back.
i have no idea where she is.
i haven't seen her.
you do know she's out there with johnny?
yeah, tell me about it.
i know.
well, i don't know about you, but i feel like i should go and look for her.
i don't-- i don't feel comfortable with her with johnny.
before it gets too late, i think we should.
i'm game, yeah.
you're gonna come with me?
yeah.
gentlemen.
where the hell were you?
i was in the woods.
have you seen carolina?
she's out there with johnny.
oh, she'll be fine, guys.
come on.
are you serious?
yes.
they're probably having sex or something.
oh, you're a funny guy.
don't be naive.
you didn't notice the chemistry they had?
hey, guys, listen.
i'm gonna look for her.
i don't know about you.
just sitting here talking.
hey, it's dark outside.
oh, fuck!
get on the bed.
get onto the bed!
the bed?
oh, my god.
what is this?
the cab started shaking...
ran outside, and the sky this just this odd color that i've never seen in my life, and i'm thinking it can't be the show doing this because that's way out of their powers and their control.
what is it?
it's like-- it's like the sky's on fire.
what?
it's like the sky's on fire.
the sky went from dark to light, and it looked like it was on fire, just like victoria said.
if this is all part of the game, it's beyond me at this point.
i don't understand how they could pull it off.
i feel like i'm on another planet.
i feel like i walked into some kind of a dream or a nightmare, and nobody-- nobody has any answers.
i don't have an answer.
i could sit here all day long and just-- it's way above my pay scale.
is it moving?
it just keeps moving.
carolina never came back today, did she?
yeah.
where-- where are they?
she's still in the woods-- the forest.
well, this can't stop us.
we still have to find her.
we can't leave her out there.
we better go now.
we're just gonna go look for her-- me and sam, daniel, miljan as well.
oh, my god.
carolina?
carolina.
are you okay?
what happened?
oh, my god.
carolina!
what happened?
are you okay?
then we see carolina stumbling towards the girls' cabin, and the girls go rushing over to her.
are you hurt somewhere?
what happened?
look at all the blood.
what happened?
she's bleeding.
back up.
guys, don't, don't-- don't go to her.
oh, my god, look at her arm.
look at her arm.
what happened to you?
you're okay.
carolina, what happened?
carolina shows up, and she's battered and disoriented.
she couldn't even speak.
she's trembling.
i don't...
she doesn't remember.
you don't remember?
what do you remember?
she didn't know what was going on.
she was saying she couldn't even, like, remember what she'd been doing out there.
she was just talking nonsense, and it was really jolting to see her come back like that.
you were with john?
and what happened?
where is he?
what were you doing with johnny?
get her some water.
get her some help.
carolina, were you with johnny?
she said she was.
what were you doing with johnny?
she said the name "johnny.
at that point, i just, you know, lost it.
listen to me.
for what?
here, just come here.
come here.
i want to say something to you.
what?
listen to me!
it's important.
you got to make sure.
you look at his hands.
okay.
his hands are a tell-tale sign, okay?
his hands will tell you if he did something.
what are you doing?
where are you going?
stay here with the girls.
stay here with the girls!
i'm not wasting any more time with this guy.
everyone wants to keep him around, thinking,
oh, yeah, he'll turn around and be a good guy.
no, i don't think so.
i'm not gonna lay around waiting for him to come stab me in the back.
she's been through a lot.
yeah.
we're gonna look after you, okay?
don't worry.
we don't know where johnny is.
carolina sort of-- she couldn't say much, but she said that she was-- they were fighting-- her and johnny were fighting.
and then, now she looks like this, so johnny should be probably fearing for his life right now because sam and neeko went after him.
let's just keep moving.
move.
the whole walking through the woods and hearing noises coming from places that, you know
we stop and we look, and there's nothing there.
it's just this whole atmosphere that everything just feels like you're being watched, you know.
whether, you know, whether you're in the woods or in the cabin, you always feel like something is watching you, and the past two nights,
i haven't slept very well, you know.
so i'm just-- you know, you're always looking over your shoulder.
you always think something's there, and, like, the whole thing with the sky now...
i don't know.
well, he's obviously around here somewhere.
yes.
you keep saying "he," "he.
look how thick the brush is here.
if there's somebody around here, we'd see them.
we hear other things.
all of a sudden, something goes flying.
i think we should be talking more in the sense of "what.
i'll go see if the water's boiled.
thank you.
i don't want to die.
i didn't ever expect that that would be a possibility on this show, and every day that i'm here,
i feel like i'm an idiot for staying, that i am gonna end up like tommy.
i don't deal well with-- abuse is not something that...
i can handle right now.
i'm scared.
and johnny was already on the outs with the group for stealing food.
i just-- how could he do that to her?
it didn't make sense.
she's such a nice lady.
johnny.
hey.
what did you do?
huh?
what did you do to carolina?
i don't know what you're talking about.
what do you mean you don't know what i'm talking about?
what'd you do to her?
i didn't
she's all cut up and shit.
i don't
i don't know.
i...
what's wrong with you?
i don't know.
i just
i kind of came to.
i was walking around, and...
i don't know.
i was
i saw her.
you saw her where?
you got to tell me what happened.
we were in the woods, and...
i don't really-- i don't really remember.
i get approached by daniel, and basically started accusing me of hurting carolina.
i didn't know what to say.
what did you to do her?
the last thing she remembers is getting in a fight with you, so you can't come back here and tell me that you didn't touch her!
i don't.
then what happened to her?
i don't know.
that's not a very good answer right now, man.
i don't-- trust me.
that's not a very good answer.
hey.
you hear that?
at the camp.
let's go.
i don't know.
are you serious?
you don't know?
you're such a scumbag.
oh, what?
so she just fell down and ended up that way?
are you kidding me?
i was in a complete haze.
i had no recollection.
i was like blacked out, like i drank too much.
he doesn't look like he knows what's going on.
i don't.
then what happened to her?
i don't know.
you were together, weren't you?
you said that.
shit!
neeko!
guys, he doesn't know!
motherfucker!
come on!
stop it!
stop!
stop it!
come on!
stop it!
neeko, stop it!
he didn't do it!
carolina starts screaming, "it's not him.
he didn't do it.
stop it!
what do you mean?
you said you don't remember.
you're a dead man.
you're a fucking dead man.
listen.
hey, hey.
hey!
calm down.
listen.
what happened?
i don't know.
talk to me.
i don't know.
johnny doesn't know anything?
he doesn't remember anything.
it was just her and him in the forest.
i know that.
i saw it in his eyes, okay?
all i remember is i talked to her.
we were arguing.
and then i-i came here, and i started getting accused, and i don't even know what the fuck is going on.
if we caught him in the woods, he would've been dead.
when i saw that look in his eyes,
i just felt that i needed to take a step back.
remember the way she came into camp?
he's got the same look on his face.
does she remember anything?
show us your hands.
oh, yeah.
i've seen that before.
what's that from?
nothing's making sense here.
and just to be angry and become a bunch of animals
we can't go killing each other.
we're still human beings.
i don't like things that i can't explain and that i don't have at least some sort of control over.
the sky changing color and looking like fire-- the producers, the show can't do that.
we're talking supernatural stuff now.
regardless of everything else, that's real, and that scared the hell out of me.
it seems like everybody at camp was convinced that i was the person that hurt her.
i've never hit a woman in my life.
i don't know why i would.
i don't remember anything, but...
i can't say that i didn't 'cause i don't
i don't know what happened.
but i know in my heart i wouldn't do that.
i don't remember anything.
all i remember is that i was... with
went to get johnny.
he was in the woods.
i found him, and i...
it's all one big blur, like one big blackout.
i have all these marks on my body, and my shirt is broken, and i don't remember.
i don't understand.
so you're telling me this is real.
yes.
it looks like it's native, handmade.
it looks like it's just a prop to me.
well, if it's a prop, it's really well-made 'cause you see the barbs.
they're curved.
that's exactly how it should look.
this is ox.
it's real ox.
and it's balanced for throwing.
it just looks perfect.
it's your choice to believe in it or not, but this is real, so...
i don't have to deal with lies in figuring out what is true, what is not.
i have to know the environment i'm in.
i have to know what's out there in order to protect myself and survive.
look at this.
so, i found this symbol that is really strange.
it has four lines and little triangles on the ends.
then i found another one and another one, and i realized it's a path.
i should follow them.
at the end, it was very close to the settlement.
i found the last one.
and i found this box.
it was a metal box.
i opened it, and it was a book.
i didn't understand anything because it was in a different language.
i would assume it's russian because it's cyrillic letters.
in the middle of me looking at it, somebody was watching at me.
it was a person.
he's staring at me.
and he just disappeared in a second.
so there are people out there.
hey.
i was just gonna try and make things better, and, like, apologize, and just wanted to let her know that i didn't, you know,
i didn't want to screw anything up or make anything awkward for her.
i guess i was in a weird mood, and i just want to apologize because i don't want to make you feel uncomfortable or anything, because i'm really glad you're
when i realized what annie's real feelings were for me,
i just thought...
i'm sort of open to love in any form right now.
so i kissed her.
which i kind of surprised myself at, to be honest.
don't worry about it.
hey.
can i have a seat?
how are you feeling?
i'm okay.
you?
i wanted to go check on her to see how she was doing 'cause i knew she had scratches and stuff on her, and she was sure freaked out like i was.
do you remember anything from last night?
no.
i don't remember a thing.
i don't remember anything either.
but i know you didn't hurt me.
i would never hurt you.
♪ people in life, they will come and go ♪
♪ like the boats sailing by my door ♪
♪ you can be the ocean, you can be the shore ♪
♪ this mystery wind, she will always blow ♪
♪ don't worry, don't worry, dear, no more ♪
♪ and now your message in a bottle ♪
♪ is being tumbled in the beach flies ♪
♪ you can be the lilies in the fields ♪
♪ i'll be the fool ♪
♪ but don't worry, don't worry, dear, no more ♪
♪ trouble in life, it will come and go ♪
can i ask you something, though?
why'd you set me up?
with the shed and the food?
she couldn't even look me in the eye.
and i was like, "well...
i was like, "it tells me all i need to know,
so i was like-- got the hell out of there.
johnny.
stop, please.
johnny, wait for me.
give me a break. oh, my god.
hey.
i know that.
johnny.
i know that.
you're an actress.
she said, like, this slogan.
like, "i know that.
i know that from somewhere.
and then it just-- the light bulb went off.
yeah, that's like your slogan.
she's that actress from that show that
i'm like, "that's how i know you.
i didn't want to do that.
i didn't want
i asked them.
you didn't want to do what?
i didn't want to burn it down.
i didn't want to set you up.
they told me to.
who's they?
the producers.
so you're-- you're helping the show?
__file_terminal__
hulk:
can't keep hiding forever.
time for you to step out of the shadows.
so, you coming?
ultimate spider-man, ready to go.
uh, where exactly are we going?
spider-man...
being labeled a menace is getting to him.
and i know how that goes.
figured i'd bring the kid to meet my support group.
this is your support group?
spidey!
check it out, hulk fans.
i can't believe we got the amaze-ball spider-man on the web show.
say what now?
these cameras follow you everywhere?
yeah, and you're just in time for our gut-buster burrito-eating contest.
i'd better not.
my delicate arachnid constitution.
plus i have reservations at the grown-ups' table.
peace out.
jameson: trusted news source j.
jonah jameson here...
this is it?
we're playing cards?
it ain't cards, it's poker.
jameson: ...
green goliath the hulk is even worse...
grab a chair, wall-crawler, and i'll deal you in.
who plays poker in a mask?
it's an unfair advantage.
ah.
i understand.
kind of a newbie at poker.
kid sits next to me.
huh?
ugh!
gee, thanks.
i guess.
as if this city wasn't suffering enough
with our own masked menace spider-man,
the rampaging monster known as the hulk has been spotted.
imagine if the two became a regular team-up.
lock your doors!
we're looking at threat level orange!
nice!
that's how i'd do it too.
my spidey sense is tingling.
yeah.
that hand stinks.
no, it's...
okay, who's the party crasher?
don't know, don't care.
so let's smash it already!
nobody trashes my poker night!
it's clobberin'...
she-hulk:
ben!
thing:
that's it!
uh, hulk?
is this part of the game?
no, it's not.
spider-man:
what do we do now, hulk?
hulk:
time to smash.
yeah, sure.
go hang out with the hulk.
play some cards.
it'll be a hoot.
it's the hulk!
run for your lives!
let's get out of here!
come on!
hulk's the good guy.
let 'em run from me.
gets them out of harm's way.
hey, leave some for us!
whoa!
that thing, it just zapped all our friends!
no.
look up there.
i'm betting that thing teleported them
into that spaceship or whatever it is.
why did we get left behind?
don't know, but we're gonna find out.
hello?
dang it!
i can't get a hold of the fantastic four or the avengers.
probably got them, too.
let me guess.
we're just gonna fly up there and go in blasting.
yup.
well, don't just sit there, webhead.
man the weapons!
less talking, more shooting.
just like a video game, except "game over
really is game over.
ew!
smells like hulk ear.
hulk?
big gun, hulk.
hulk?
i see it!
well, turn!
spider-man:
you are unclear on the whole turning concept.
hulk:
bought enough time to get you into a spacesuit, didn't i?
yeah, she-hulk's spacesuit.
thanks a lot.
whoa, whoa, whoa!
it's the closest thing we have in your size.
besides, it's a good look on you.
hilarious.
what do we do first?
shut down the tractor beam or rescue the beautiful princess?
will you shut it?
stay behind me.
don't get hurt.
and be quiet.
yeah, 'cause you're as quiet as a little green mouse.
whoa.
you were right.
they're all here.
the fantastic four, the avengers,
hulk:
and my agents of s.m.a.s.h.!
paralyzed in some kind of prison bubbles.
spider-man:
and what is that?
spider-man:
and there's the thing.
the collector:
magnificent, isn't it?
every major hero, including many rare and unique ones,
most in mint condition.
so what are you, some kind of collector?
i'm the collector!
and i know who you are.
the rampaging hulk
and the masked vigilante spider-man.
i've researched this planet to learn which heroes to collect.
from monitoring your trusted information dispenser j.
jonah jameson,
it's clear that you two do not qualify.
i don't qualify as a hero?
you can't listen to anything j.
jonah jerkface says.
i mean, wolverine?
wolverine is a hero and i'm not?
that guy runs around stabbing people!
and he smells like wet dog,
which in itself is a punishable crime.
you're letting them go now!
ooh!
that looks like it hurt.
yep.
the collector:
you're not heroes.
you're menaces.
undesirable and in poor condition.
you're not collectible and you have no value.
spider-man:
oh, not the trash chute!
menaces indeed.
but look at these interesting gamma-powered variants.
the red one, the blue one,
the primitive one.
and even a rare female variant.
and they're all mine!
how humiliating.
and of course it's all been caught on camera.
oh, great.
someone turned up the heat.
that's not another teleporter.
no, it's a disintegrator.
note to spidey, next time the hulk takes you into space,
don't go.
too late now.
figures.
i put on a mask, try to be a hero,
and get thrown out with the garbage.
a mask doesn't make you a hero.
it's the guy beneath it.
oh, this is not good!
i've got an idea!
you think those puny spidey webs are gonna hold my weight?
these puny spidey webs will hold
but my super-springy slingshot is only gonna work
if you're strong enough to get us out of here.
status update, bug-man.
i do strong!
all right.
hulk, anytime now.
hulk?
okay, now!
it worked.
of course it worked.
i wish j.
jonah jerkison was around so i could rub it in his face.
been there.
kids gotta learn you can't control how people see you.
you can only control the things you do.
ultra rare, this hero.
so valuable, in near mint condition.
fitting he's the last of my acquisitions.
now it's time for phase two.
phase two?
stay here and watch my back.
i'm on it.
stop!
guys, he's coming back!
my precious collection!
what are you doing?
what's it look like i'm doing?
a-bomb:
oh, hey, who did that?
what died?
it was me.
revenge of the burrito.
hey, i was stuck in there with it.
ugh!
makes me want to climb back into my pod.
ugh!
my collectibles!
out of their packaging!
you're no longer in mint condition
and more trouble than you're worth.
this way.
we'll have to come back for the others.
wait for me!
perhaps i'll salvage some meager value from you
once you're in pieces.
probes,
hunt down and exterminate those defective collectibles.
it's time to execute my plan
to make my collection priceless.
make his collection priceless?
what does that even mean?
work it out later.
spidey coming through!
we gotta go back.
we can free the avengers...
hulk:
no time!
spider-man:
whoa, whoa, whoa!
cover us!
whoa!
okay, will do!
okay, what's our plan?
well, our favorite fully-articulated space hoarder
said he'd make his collection priceless.
so how do you fix it so your action figures are one of a kind?
you wreck everyone else's.
or you wreck the place they came from.
you mean that maniac is going to destroy the earth?
yup.
we have to find out what he's gonna use and smash it.
look for a big cannon, a giant robot...
spider-man:
a really humongous bomb?
that'll work.
hulk:
we don't have much time before this firecracker pops the earth.
so what?
i can disable it.
a-bomb, you help him.
both:
i gotta work with him?
spider-man:
if the probes are after us, the collection room might be unguarded.
good point.
jen, use the teleporter to beam the others out of here.
skaar will cover you.
all right, shaggy, you're with me.
spidey, you're with me.
really?
you want me with you?
i mean, sure.
if you need me for the big throw-down, i'm in.
people underestimate the webhead.
he's just a kid but he's tough.
handy in a fight.
and he's smart.
let's do this thing.
get this party popper open and cut the blue wire.
or is it the red wire?
will you zip it?
i disposed of ordnance in the military.
it just requires a little bit of patience!
neither of which...
shut up!
i'm trying to concentrate!
yeah, let's see, green...
blue.
red!
uh.
this bomb is making me mad!
i don't think that's working.
red:
quick, hide!
a-bomb:
all right, all right!
skaar?
see that thingy there?
no smashy-smash.
we need it to get back to earth.
skaar know.
skaar not dumb.
we need a distraction.
skaar is awesome.
i mean, he's a wild dog, but he's awesome.
great.
the controls.
sure, just use the teleporter, he says.
beam the others out.
what about the part where i don't read alien jerk language?
maybe this?
oops.
maybe not.
get him!
whoa!
i'm okay.
no, i'm not.
i could hear your footsteps from a galaxy away.
think of how valuable my collection of earthlings will be
when they're the last ones left alive.
no one on your planet wants you.
so why should i?
you are unworthy.
you are making me angry, you obsessive little twerp!
obsessive little twerp?
a-bomb:
how's it coming, red?
ha-ha!
now we're cooking!
cut the red wire and disarm this baby
in no time.
red?
the bomb's gonna drop.
red:
i'm working on it!
have you lost your mind?
no, i found the answer.
i smashed the door thingy so they can't open.
the bomb can't drop.
you're welcome.
oh, so it'll blow up in here!
with us!
great idea, kid.
great idea!
so...
maybe we run for it?
she-hulk: come on, come on!
has to be some way to shut that thing down.
we're running out of time here.
i needed that.
yeah!
smashy-smash!
whoo!
ow!
organs squishing...
kid, i might not be a hero, but you are.
new york city's lucky to have you.
i'm sorry no one ever got to see your true hero self.
what is he talking about?
what does he mean, "true hero self"?
everyone knows a true hero isn't the costume,
but the guy beneath the mask.
yeah, but you knew that, right?
there's a hero underneath here?
this i must see for myself.
and are you ever in for a treat.
for i am the amazing, spectacular, ultimate spider-man!
no.
you're just some mundane adolescent earthling.
nothing special at all!
that's the point.
you hear that coming a galaxy away?
never thought your giant green ninja skills would come in so handy.
i never thought your ability to talk would come in so handy.
sorry for you folks at home,
but my identity has to remain a secret.
only got seconds before ka-blooey.
jen, get us out of here!
teleport hub's online.
i think i can send everyone back in one shot.
spider-man:
hey, i think it's working!
hulk:
where have you two been?
red:
saving your butts!
but, my collection.
whew!
nick of time.
we all present and accounted for?
everybody.
plus one.
i was wrong about you.
despite what i've heard, you're not menaces.
we never saw ourselves as menaces.
and we aren't.
you've proven that you are among
the greatest of earth's heroes.
next time, i'll come for you first.
uh, and that's a good thing, how?
hey, night's still young.
we could finish our poker game.
or you, me, skaar, and hulk
have a late night gut-buster burrito-eating contest.
what do you think?
hulk:
twenty-five burritos and counting.
hulk out.
__file_terminal__
thank you, tommaso.
a pleasure to serve, your highness.
hello, alfonso.
my love.
tommaso, how's your arm?
almost healed.
i must go.
and when will you have time for me?
i am the pope's counselor.
i cannot control the hours in my days.
here comes the prince of vipers.
you must tread lightly around my brother.
he is not angry with you, but because he lost so many fine men in his most recent campaign.
he is angry at me because he is jealous.
do what you can to placate him.
cesare, hello.
and goodbye.
i am late.
farewell for now, my love.
she loves me more than ever.
if her love for d'este grows in equal measure, will you fight with him again?
i only did as any husband would.
and as any father would, recklessly causing the near death of little rodrigo.
that dog d'este was to blame.
he had no business touching my child.
your child.
his.
ours.
agapito...
if i killed you right here, all of italy would treat me as a hero.
but you are not a hero, alfonso.
and only men like you, who lack true courage, want me dead.
pinturicchio just finished the addition, the paint is still wet.
now the taino indians will forever be considered god's children.
even as the spanish continue to murder them.
cardinal d'amboise awaits.
holiness!
not now.
oh, but holiness, my king, the great federigo has an ever creeping concern that you favor the french.
king louis has worked hard to earn our friendship, while naples hides leisurely behind our throne.
did naples not give lucrezia a princely husband?
di calabria is worthless.
goffredo is married to...
sancia, who is worse.
yeah.
well, even so, my king, the great federigo has always been your ally.
he pledges support for cesare's claim to the romagna.
a pledge in word or in blood?
in coin.
thirty thousand ducats.
a gift of gratitude from louis d'orléans.
what have we done to earn a chest full of gratitude?
you allow french troops to pass through the papal states.
have we granted such permission?
we anticipate that you will, so that louis may claim his hereditary title:
king of naples.
a gift?
twenty thousand ducats.
papal permission is worth more, at least 50,000.
the king of naples has outbid you.
holiness!
the son of god seems to find much peace in death.
perhaps because he no longer bears the burden of leading men out of darkness.
his countenance does not represent death, but the communion between the divine and humanity.
the virgin.
she is so youthful.
my mother died when i was five.
this is how i remember her.
i honor her incorruptible purity, which cannot be marred by the winds of time.
maestro, come join my court at cesena.
you can paint scenes of battle on the walls of the war room.
i am not a painter.
i am a sculptor.
and await a commission from the signory in florence, a large, very large sculpture of david, just after he slays goliath.
or perhaps before.
i have not yet decided.
i will build you a studio big enough to sculpt the colossus of rhodes.
eminence.
cesare, i did not know you had an interest in art.
i have an interest in creatures and comforts of every kind.
now this piece is more in keeping with the sensibility i had in mind when i commissioned the bacchus.
art is the handmaiden of theology.
art is the sister of theology, and sometimes sisters clash.
my next commission, buonarroti, you will execute the sculpture exactly as i describe.
i only want that for which i have paid.
like all men of wealth, you make the mistake that money gives you the right to tell an artist how to create, rather than know your proper place.
proper place?
on your knees, in awe.
as you went to your knees after losing the battle for faenza?
your father has had another epileptic fit.
no worse than the last.
he has recovered.
have the attacks increased in frequency?
thank you, francesc.
perhaps you should delay your return to the battlefield.
our father's decline only hastens the need for me to advance.
i hesitate only because i have not yet devised the proper military strategy against faenza.
i have asked maestro da vinci to invent a weapon of stunning terror, and also to redesign the papal prisons to make escape impossible.
soon our cells will teem with the citizens of faenza.
revenge will be my mistress.
you carry too much vengeance in your heart.
you must learn to forgive.
cesare, you must forgive alfonso.
for breathing.
i have come to love him.
not in a perfect way.
but then again, which love is perfect?
i will not leave your children without a father.
alfonso, no.
yes.
i have sat in ferrara, stewing on the stove of deep desire.
i could stay away from your touch no longer.
a sin is a sin, no matter what the reason.
louis will not be happy to hear that the pope demands more coinage.
we stand still and the river flows.
whether there is victory or defeat, the river will still flow.
you and i, louis, the pope, matter not, d'amboise.
the tiber will be here long after we are bone.
and does your promise to my king no longer matter?
a promise pope alexander now dithers on.
louis worries about you, cesare.
that your defeat in faenza will breed only more defeat.
he believes that you will return to the path of victory by ensuring the french path to naples.
if you cannot help him with that, you should jump into your beloved tiber.
yes.
that's right.
okay, that's good.
grazie.
how nice and fat that bird is.
signora, what a pleasure.
when you make the fowl into a tart, season it with cassia buds.
you paid to set the creature free?
i do not eat the innards of animals.
i only sketch their beauty.
rome is very fortunate to have two florentine geniuses in residence.
i have just seen maestro michelangelo.
cesare has invited him to the court at cesena.
cesare has invited him?
to paint the frescoes.
he is no painter.
his paintings are wooden.
but he is a fine sculptor.
sculpture is the lesser art.
says the horse modeler, unable to cast a statue in bronze, you were forced to give up in shame.
there was no shame.
there was illumination.
the sculpture was an experiment in casting from which i learned that which i set out to learn.
but you never finish much of what you start, do you?
other than assembling your wardrobe.
my nose...
you broke my nose!
good day, signora.
i am freshly returned from valencia with gacet's birth document.
proof he is the son of a muslim whore.
your voyage to spain was fruitful.
but not quite sufficient.
rodrigo borgia will be easily manipulated once gacet has been discredited.
we cannot afford to merely discredit the heathen.
we must eviscerate him.
you must find a witness who will testify against gacet.
i have already done so.
i have obtained unimpeachable evidence that your secretary, francesc gacet, is in fact a muslim.
his spanish birth certificate.
guards!
may i introduce renato gacet?
please.
my kinsman francesc was born aslam gacet, a child of my late sister, raised a mudejar.
to this day he practices in secret the sins of mohammed.
we have heard enough!
you have been living under the influence of an unholy beast!
we demand gacet be stripped of his position and executed in the name of the true god!
we will do no such thing!
holiness!
you cannot support this... paynim.
that would be a betrayal of the petrine throne upon which you sit.
aslam gacet died 50 years ago, when we personally witnessed his rebirth and baptism as francesc.
since that day, he has embodied all we could hope from a convert to the universal church.
send this infidel to prison.
please...
aslam?
francesc?
save me!
now, cardinal colonna, if you are done making false claims, we have greater matters on our agenda.
cesare borgia, duke of valentinois, comte of diois, lord of issoudun, prefect of rome, gonfalonier of god's great church.
you summon me, holy father.
how can i be of service?
for your dominance, by war or treaty of imola, forli, cesena,
pesaro, pisa, bertinoro, san marino,
bologna, nepi, fano, urbino,
siena, savignano, piombino,
elba and pianosa.
for your extraordinary bravery, intelligence and compassion i proclaim you prince of the romagna, in your own name.
cesare borgia, this title shall be passed down to your children and your children's children.
all lands that you have claimed and will claim are released from papal control to your sole possession until the day of judgment.
in nomine patris et filii et spiritus sancti.
how can i be prince of the romagna when i have not yet conquered all of the romagna?
i was soundly defeated by faenza, which has caused my enemies to grow in fierceness and in number.
you are what we say you are and what people believe you are.
the title of prince raises you up, so that you may bring your adversaries down.
go back to faenza and subdue duke astorre manfredi.
he elicits support from the duke of rimini, and so i must first force pandolfo malatesta into inaction.
hmm.
how will you accomplish that?
do you think i abducted his daughter dorotea purely for my own pleasure?
who does cesare borgia think he is, summoning me to rome as if i am his serf?
i am no man's serf.
who?
duke pandolfo malatesta of rimini.
pandolfo the bad, welcome to the chambers of cesare the worst.
so the rumors of orgies are true.
i have collected the finest wenches from across the romagna.
each heart a different conquest.
damn you, borgia.
you did not conquer my daughter's heart.
you abducted her body.
dorotea, are you here?
duke astorre manfredi invites you to take up arms against me, even while the whereabouts of your precious dorotea remain unknown.
i see.
so she is nothing more than a bargaining tool.
stand down in this fight and your daughter's safety increases.
if not, i cannot shield her innocence from fortuna's cruelty.
cesare... please!
i have not held my innocent girl in two years.
you have my word rimini will not interfere.
conquer faenza.
but please...
tell my daughter that i...
that i miss her.
what say you?
i have never seen my father cry.
becoming a father is easy enough, being one proves more difficult.
mariano, come to me.
you do not look well.
in fact, your head aches.
your brain is about to explode.
why was mariano running from here?
giulia, do not tell me that you fuck our servants.
no, mama, i have a grander plan.
my great aunt enrichetta, she was quite adept at oculus malus, was she not?
the evil eye?
are you studying the black arts to use on the pope for what he did to your cousin?
and all his other devilry.
i would be proud of your cunning if there were results.
yet, borgia still lives.
i do not want to kill rodrigo.
at least not until alessandro has risen higher in the hierarchy.
and becomes the next pontiff.
and in the meantime,
i will use the evil eye to torture rodrigo, to diminish the thing he holds most dear.
his manhood?
yes.
but my curse cannot be truly effective unless he opens himself up to me.
so touch him on his pene.
no, he needs to be...
he needs to be emotionally receptive.
rodrigo has placed a barrier between his heart and mine.
then find the key.
tell any man your deepest, darkest fears and he will feel compelled to comfort you.
where is gacet?
should we summon him?
no, i am happy for the privacy.
because gacet would dissuade us from granting you that for which you are about to ask?
i ask nothing other than your ear.
we give you both, perked.
i am worried that i am evil.
rodrigo, when i die i will be satan's slave.
why?
what have you done this time?
what have i not done?
giulia.
i have missed your strong arms.
holiness, you requested me.
we will continue another time.
how did you find renato gacet?
i was given his name by francesc himself.
liar!
you, della rovere and the colonna, failing to incapacitate our papacy, try to harm those we love.
but where will that leave you, slug?
exactly where you are:
crawling under della rovere's slipper.
if any harm comes to gacet from any quarter, do not think we will spare you the full wrath of our supreme powers.
me entiendes?
yes, holiness.
i am your servant.
be gone from our sight, excellency.
and instead of an arrow, this giant crossbow can fire large stones, or possibly balls of flame.
is this apparatus not too unwieldy to be practical?
practicality is not the objective.
since my failure at faenza, my men have lost courage.
if more die, the rest will be demoralized and rendered useless.
the title of prince is meaningless unless i first become one.
again i need a way, a practical way, to attack without soldiers.
there is a method, very dangerous, developed in france called
un feu ardent et empoisonnement par la fumée.
fervent fire and poison smoke.
released into the air, the gas floats down upon a city, killing every breathing man.
how can we obtain this gas?
with the proper ingredients, i can manufacture the powder.
there is, as always, a complication.
the wind.
a shift toward my troops would make them the victims.
even you, brave cesare, cannot direct a gale.
still, this toxic tonic is a devastating device.
the fear such a weapon instills outweighs the damage it can inflict.
the threat of the annihilation will be enough to bring astorre manfredi down.
begin your preparations.
concoct the gas.
you've offered michelangelo buonarroti a position at court.
now is not the time for green-eyed jealousy.
only the victorious can afford that luxury.
so, both of you claim this fine piece of carrara marble.
each of you wishes to sculpt a statue celebrating the moment david killed goliath.
vannozza, since you are so steeped in the realm of the arts, we turn to you to help us decide which virtuoso deserves the prize.
speak, my friends.
is there a david trapped inside this slab?
there is... and the giant as well.
lay the marble down upon the grass and there he is:
goliath bleeding to death.
a frail yet triumphant david perched atop his shoulder.
supreme pontiff, can you not see the sword of david thrust deep between the heathen's eyes?
can you see the horror?
can you see the glory?
we can see only what we see, maestro.
and you, buonarroti?
there is no goliath inside the stone.
if there is no goliath, there is no david.
and there lies the fallacy.
this marble holds david alone, before battle.
holiness, if david is depicted without goliath, there is no indication the subject is david.
it would be the carving of an ordinary man!
true beauty lies not in victory, but in the hope of victory.
hope shines forth in the fleeting moment before david chooses to hurl a simple stone, when weakest he puts his trust in the lord.
this marble holds an ordinary man, yes, transformed by his leap of faith.
he should be celebrated for fidelity, not for brutality.
if you succeed, buonarroti, so does mankind.
begin work today.
is that blood under your nose, leonardo?
perhaps the prince will speak on my behalf.
we have made our decision.
i return to faenza to reverse my defeat.
be certain of your strategy.
you must not fail this time.
i will succeed or make ready my tomb.
your papal legate leaves immediately for one final attempt to negotiate faenza's peaceful surrender.
with what leverage?
da vinci has a new method of warfare...
the specifics... afterwards.
you are brilliant, my son, but you do not know everything.
do not pretend that you do.
his grace, duke astorre manfredi.
your grace.
is that... the death machine?
may i offer a demonstration of the deadly gas?
well, why else would i allow you to drag me out here?
we will need an animal of some kind.
you and you.
you are sending them to their deaths.
the only thing that will die is cesare borgia's ambition.
where should they stand?
by that tree.
place the cloth over your nose and mouth.
ten hut!
what we took as rumor is truth.
he is magnificent.
company... halt!
they are so silent.
astorre is much beloved.
his surrender is their surrender.
they will come to love me as well.
de lorqua, you will remain in faenza as governor.
i am honored by your trust, cesare.
as in cesena, we will improve the lives of faenza's citizens.
what brings them joy brings us joy as well.
so, this is the youth who outwitted me.
i admire your determination.
and i your perseverance.
together we are a fountain of endless possibilities.
i am the wife in my marriage.
your status is in less peril than your life.
cesare will kill you.
i know, that is why you must go to faenza.
keep your presence hidden.
but if you are discovered, deliver this scroll to cesare, once again reaffirming my desire to serve him.
to astorre manfredi, deliver this.
tell him there is no reason for him to live under the borgia thumb.
this knife is from the collection of alfonso d'este.
if used to kill cesare, neither manfredi nor i will shoulder the burden of blame.
go.
cesare, you have been extremely generous.
most conquerors would imprison me, not dine as if my guest.
think of me not as a conqueror, but as a partner.
we will indulge the poor and humble the rich.
peace and prosperity will be the order of each day.
forgive my suspicions, but why do you deal with me differently than the other dukes whom you defeated?
your people do not treat you as a god because they fear you.
they think you deserve it.
i respect that, as any good leader ought to accept the fervor of his subjects.
with your consent, i will address them tomorrow in hopes of calming their fears and winning their hearts.
will you stand beside me?
of course.
i go to work on my disquisition.
let me show you to your chamber.
i have a secret to tell you.
duke astorre.
duke astorre, are you here?
you said we should meet here.
the young turkish girls are abducted from their parents who love them.
or purchased from parents who love gold more.
though the women are slaves, their lives are better in the harem.
because they have brocades and jewels?
perhaps they would prefer to live in the desert, eating only sand.
who is there?
let us take a digestif in the papal office.
we must complete the ecclesiastical appointments for umbria.
we will escort our daughter home when we are finished.
the life of a slave is a miserable one.
aah!
stop this!
you?
your highness, i...
save your lies, tommaso.
you will need them.
henceforward, you are loyal to me.
all right, tell me.
what is the news?
astorre has agreed to assassinate cesare tonight.
rome will soon bow to me.
guards!
the prince has been murdered.
come on.
quickly, we must get him inside.
get a physician.
your highness.
i rode as fast as i could.
how fares lucrezia?
she is too young to be a widow.
not a widow.
our physicians say di calabria's survival seems possible.
the attack is a shocking reminder of how unsafe rome can be.
you think this is random violence?
i will investigate, identify and arrest those responsible.
issue a decree, in my name.
anyone caught carrying arms in the area between castel sant'angelo and the vatican will be executed.
eliminating all weapons does not seem possible.
do you believe there will be another attempt on di calabria's life?
what was left unfinished after dinner can be accomplished before breakfast.
illustrious domina...
how fares prince alfonso of salerno?
i do not believe that you have ever deigned to speak to me, eminence.
you must be very concerned.
the victim's uncle, my king, the great federigo is deeply concerned and therefore, so am i.
federigo's concern and your concern are no concern of mine.
if di calabria dies and a borgia is responsible...
naples will make war on rome.
my darling alfonso, i thought i had lost you forever.
you have not lost me, sweet wife.
you have saved me from your brother.
cesare is not responsible.
he has even ordered an investigation.
a screen of black smoke.
just as he investigated the murder of your brother juan, a crime which cesare himself committed.
there is no evidence that the attack on di calabria was cesare's doing.
many others wish your husband dead.
for instance?
cardinal san severino.
he holds a grudge because alfonso di calabria usurped the throne of salerno, once held by the san severino family.
preposterous.
my uncle federigo took the crown away from san severino's family, not me.
the cardinal and i have since dined together in pleasant company.
cesare hired those thugs to savage me.
cousin lucrezia, the holy father seeks your counsel regarding a very serious matter.
i have uncovered a conspiracy to assassinate cesare.
do you accuse me, knave?
lucrezia, go.
defend me to the pope.
tommaso will remain.
if you leave, tommaso, they will kill me.
tommaso.
yes, there was a plot to kill cesare in faenza.
who was the mastermind?
i know few details or who conspired.
your brother simply said, "the culprit is being taken care of.
alfonso!
this is too much suffering for one young woman to bear.
lucrezia, you must be strong for the sake of your children.
my children?
you swore that you would not leave them fatherless.
murderer!
cesare is innocent.
you're blind.
he is guilty.
if cesare did kill di calabria, then he deserved to die.
papa, how can you say such a thing?
i was at dinner with cardinal d'amboise.
that is proof of where you were, not where your orders were being carried out.
you can pretend with others, not with me.
you have examined the corpse in the bedchamber?
perhaps prince alfonso rolled off his bed, hitting his head wound on the stone floor, causing his death.
or perhaps he thought he could fly.
where is tommaso albanese?
he should have been protecting di calabria.
albanese has fled, which indicates his involvement...
what reason would tommaso have to kill alfonso?
we have no magic glass to peer into the hearts of strangers.
we must confront them for their actions.
track and trap him.
if alfonso had not married me, he would still be alive.
and now, i am dying of grief.
oh, lucrezia...
your name is tommaso albanese.
you were secretary to alfonso di calabria, prince of bisciglie and salerno.
your obligation was to assist and protect his royal personage.
have we said any untrue words thus far?
your holiness, no.
last night, where were you?
speak the truth.
with the prince.
who attacked him?
i did.
why?
you have caused great pain to us borgia.
does not our grief deserve an explanation?
alfonso married into your family, and you are the pope.
so perhaps he was good to you, or you ignored his actions.
did you ever once see how he treated those under him?
do you even notice those under you?
he whipped me.
he broke my arm, not because i did wrong, but he felt pleasure in hurting me.
but you did not know that.
and you did not know that as such matters are not part of your unceasing lust, gluttony and greed.
the guilty always accuse the judge.
one more question, albanese.
how did you get my unicorn mask?
in rome masks are available for any occasion.
we will inform your sister that the guilty party has been found.
he seemed convinced.
yes.
i have played my part.
and i will play mine.
the pope will not seek capital vengeance.
then you will mysteriously disappear from this cell.
and, and my daughter?
your daughter will receive a stipend for the rest of your days.
i will hang albanese.
we begin to believe a life of prison is a much worse punishment.
you would let a murderer breathe?
first your son, now your son-in-law dies without retribution.
romans must know that their pontiff represents a world of justice.
you must enact justice.
do what you think best.
be not sorrowful even as others who have no hope are sorrowful.
for if we believe that jesus died and rose again, then we sleep in jesus.
but i would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning those who are asleep.
for this we say by the word of god that we, who are alive will remain alive until the coming of the lord.
amen.
she cannot eat.
she cannot sleep.
i fear lucrezia will waste away.
she will go to nepi and be restored.
nepi.
why nepi?
the city is away from rome, yet not too far.
she will recover more quickly where she can escape her memories.
where she can escape her memories?
or where you will not have to bear witness to her sadness?
there is no greater sorrow than to see our children suffer.
who?
alfonso d'este.
yes.
i come to return this.
i have granted your request, allowing you to murder di calabria, yet guaranteeing that lucrezia will never suspect you.
she already thinks the worst of me,
but you she believes to be a mountain of virtue.
i am not a good man, but i gladly endanger my soul out of love for lucrezia.
yes.
you truly love her.
and she, you.
yet, i am surprised that you would entrust your sister's life to a murderer.
what am i but a murderer?
and for you, murder is the exception, not the norm.
soon she and i will wed.
i have fulfilled my promise not to leave her children without a father.
as little rodrigo's true father, i am forever in your debt.
yes.
yes, you are.
__file_terminal__
this programme contains some strong language some scenes which some viewers may find upsetting
car revs
tyres screech
now, they're known as the pink panthers.
they're a gang that steals jewels from high-end stores all over the world.
and one of their alleged members...
armed with this magnum revolver and helped by an accomplice, he pounced.
we are talking about an international criminal group made up of more than 200 people.
they are organised in independent cells and they live in different countries.
these are all people from the former yugoslavia.
the core of the group comes from montenegro.
there is another substantial group from serbia.
car horn beeps
one of the panthers said that every robbery that is lasting more than 22 seconds is a great risk.
car horn beeps again
there's no alarm, no security system, they can be good, that cannot be broken.
two hours, you're in another country and you are safe.
that's what i like, you know.
i have a lot to tell you about these robberies and there were many.
but the best job i've did was in spain.
we waited for a festival that was about to take place and we waited a long time.
it was some kind of a religious thing, fiesta - music, dancing.
some kind of noise that they couldn't hear us banging through the walls.
and now the action could begin.
phone dials
phone rings
my name is novak, you know, and people call us pink panthers.
he laughs
and english people, they call us, because of the film.
i read somewhere that one inspector, i don't know where, he said that we are terrorists or something like that.
modern terrorists, but it's not true.
i mean, we are just taking something unimportant for rich people, for us - who doesn't have that, you know?
he laughs
we started with some houses, you know, some cars and something like that.
but jewelleries, we find out, is much easier.
jewellery's small, it's expensive, it gets you more money.
we can be in china, we can be in singapore, tokyo, dubai.
wherever they have rich stuff, we can be there.
alarm blares
seagulls squawk
here, we are really in the middle of the old town of geneva.
and there you have all the...all the biggest jewelleries with million and million of stuff in the windows.
there you have chatila...
this jewellery was attacked by the pinks in 2009.
that mean they enter by this door and after that, there were, in this road, two scooter...
you say scooter in english?
..were waiting and when they finished the robberies, they jump on the scooter and they leave the place.
gubelin was attacked one or two times by the pinks.
graff
graff geneva... ..de grisogono, chopard, adler...
about the statistics or numbers, approximately we have 500 cases of robberies and burglaries made by the pinks.
speaking about the value of all the robberies, approximately 300 millions of us dollars.
if you take all their crimes together, they are the best jewellery thieves in the world.
i know, but like you say, it's a pink panther!
and there are colleagues who give me that one or two years ago.
they were involved in a case we began here and they work on.
and they find this big pink panther and they bring it here.
and it's a joke between all the teams in europe working on the pink panthers.
phone rings in background
producer:
can you tell me, when did you first hear of the pink panthers?
it was in 2000.
at the beginning, it was different.
for me, it was different as the other teams about the organisation - it was more organised.
the action was very, very fast, when they come.
speech not audible
'they have made a lot of robberies, so that mean when they come, 'they are confident, they are sure about "what i have to do".
'the preparation is very, very good.
'that means they come sometimes some months before 'to try to find which jewellery they are going to attack.
'and after that, to know exactly how they are going to work, 'how many people they need to be in there, 'how they are going to escape.
'and after that, they do the robbery.
'sometimes, working on bad guys,' there is something very particular, very special, between... there is a respect but, at the same time, it is like a game.
they know that we are hunting them.
because it's a little bit like that from pacino and de niro in the film.
it was like that, but they are always movies.
they are not the reality.
that's...
we just must remember that they are bad guys going inside jewellery with guns.
'we understood in this time that they were able to do things, incredible, 'that nobody had done before.'
the first time, we didn't know that they were pink panthers.
you know, this name did not exist, at this time.
the first time, we just think it was one robbery or two robberies, that's all.
we did not identify, the first time, the importance of the group.
it was a challenge cos they are crossing the borders very fast, after the robbery - very easily.
we started to understand that it was a group.
the only thing we know - that they were coming from former yugoslavia.
so that's all we had, the first time.
and so we started to identify the different city they were coming from in former yugoslavia - especially montenegro, from cetinje.
yugoslavia.
few americans know little, if anything, about yugoslavia.
one reason is because not many people know where to find it.
actually, it's really quite simple - just go to italy and make a right.
yugoslavia.
a popular misconception about yugoslavia is that it is a neighbouring country of the soviet union.
in actuality, it borders seven european countries, none of them being russia.
a bigger misconception than the location, though, is the country itself.
when most americans think of yugoslavia, this is not what comes to mind...
..or this... ..or this...
..or even this.
dog barks in the distance
'the first time i heard about panthers were in 2004.
'it was a surprise.
'and my first thought when newspapers published' that the perpetrators were three serbs,
i said, "fuck!
this is all we needed.
my second thought, however, was, "hmm, interesting.
how very skilful people.
because i didn't know how they did it.
well, before 2000, we don't have pink panthers.
some people started with so big and exclusive heists... ..mostly in europe, only europe.
and after it, we have some of the panthers robbed out of europe.
they went to bahrain.
they went to japan.
they went to dubai.
i'm working right now for birn,
balkan investigative reporting network.
and, at the moment, i am looking for pink panthers, like i'm mad.
i'm working for more than two years on this.
at first, i didn't believe it was possible to find any of them.
why would any say, "look, i'm pink panther, i'm going to help you"?
so that required a lot of work, a lot of travelling, a lot of phone calls...
..finding sources on the places you would never believe you can find them.
that usually meant being on the road all the time, travelling to the region all the time, meeting all kinds of people all the time.
i must talk to dozens of different people, all kinds of people, meet them, be ready to meet them at any time.
you must make them trust you - that you are not going to talk to the police, that you are not going to put any of them in danger.
if you know, when you do something so extraordinary which attracts the attention of the whole world and many people say, "bravo, you robbed the bigger criminals.
well, that can light some fire inside.
i believe so.
ok, so if we start with...
could he just introduce himself?
ok, mike, so we've agreed that we will record this interview, but not show your face.
so, we'll use your real words but we'll animate you and your voice.
no face.
not my real voice.
so, tell me, who are the pink panthers?
well, i don't have a badge that says pink panther on it.
we are a network of teams working together and as i was involved, i became part of the network.
everybody has their specific job to do, understand?
so we all depend on each other.
those in the inner circle are called family.
but you have guys who don't know who their bosses or associates are.
you have to be in with them for a long time dealing with these kind of bigger jobs.
you get tips from your own supervisor, but there is also a wider chain of command.
you never know where you stand in the hierarchy, because you never meet the boss.
you don't know this guy is the big boss.
there's no such thing.
no big boss.
you need a brain, knowledge.
and experience to do this work.
this means the jobs that we do and the other gangs that do sex, drugs, murder, they rarely cross over.
so, tell me, what is it about the diamond?
i don't know why people spend money on diamonds.
i don't suffer from this showing off.
i have a rolex, but as a souvenir.
but diamonds, nah, they don't attract me.
for me, diamonds mean good cash.
nothing else.
not anyone can do this job.
you must be born to do it.
you must firstly trust in yourself... ..because if you are weak, you can't do it.
women in the panthers have to be...exceptional.
exceptional.
i was extremely good looking.
30kgs less.
i had long red hair at the time.
although i had frequent transformations, very frequent.
i would be sometimes blonde, sometimes brunette.
you can only have one in each gang.
and we have high requirements for the women.
they have the leading roles.
they have to do the main job, so they do the scouting, they enter, they record and they bring the plan.
that means the woman has to be intelligent, she has to be beautiful and she has to love money.
the guys do a great majority of jobs.
but they also need a woman on their team.
everyone always thinks it's the men, men, men.
but without woman nothing would be done.
lela has to be dressed in most expensive clothes, you know?
most elegant clothes, wearing expensive jewellery.
also to have her own chauffeur.
she had to act exactly like madonna.
i had to look very powerful.
it was stuff by burberry, then chanel.
whatever was in and whatever was popular.
i wouldn't even know some of the brands that existed.
but the stuff purchased, it was well known that it was very expensive.
thunder rumbles
alarm blares
so, how did it all begin?
in the beginning it was individuals.
small shops, casinos.
we went where there was money, gold.
and eventually, jobs got bigger and better.
when i was in italy, i worked with this guy from kosovo.
like his apprentice.
he could open a safe in two minutes.
we were together for four years and by the end, i could open a cat in no time.
what's the cat?
the cat, we call a cat, the safe.
jewellery is like a magnet for crime.
it's worth a lot and the crooks want it.
hello, i'm mike for...
jewellery crime is big business, often run by organised criminals who won't hesitate to use violence in the city, suburbs or out in the country.
jewellery crime causes $1.1 billion in losses each year from all sources, including consumers.
but in most stores, most of the jewellery does end up here at closing time, and even though it's not as common as you might think, the safe is still a target.
i have a lot to tell you about these robberies, and there were many, but the best job i did was in spain.
perfect plan.
the jewellery shop was a perfect target.
it was a beautiful boutique, you know.
very high class.
there was, in this city, a most beautiful jewellery shop.
everything with diamonds.
rings with diamonds, bracelets, necklaces.
very beautiful.
jewellery rarely achieves that kind of sparkle, very rarely, but we had no access, no access at all.
so we had to do it in a different way.
we tried many ways.
we had different ideas about the job and then, finally, we had the idea - just to hire a shop next door.
next to the jewellery shop was the souvenir shop.
in order to get to the jewellery shop, we needed to go through this second shop first.
she met the spanish shop owner and befriended him.
she had to lure the guy into a trap.
i didn't go to seduce him, but my very appearance contributed to his joy.
he employed me at his place.
not to work, because i couldn't speak the language well enough, but to oversee things.
she had to do a good job because we needed to gain his trust.
of course, her beauty helped.
he thought they could get closer, that they would be together every day.
well, i don't see why i should feel guilty.
it is his problem that he fell in love with me and that my presence brought him lots of pleasure.
i couldn't do anything about that.
so when she was there, she examined the wall, which gave us an idea that we could knock it down and where we could exit...
..which way we could run.
she was there so she could scan and find that information, see if the plan would be possible.
the reason why i spent a lot of time with the spanish guy was so that
i could observe exactly when the jewellery shop closed - when would it open, when they would go out for a coffee, for how long they would be out.
generally, it was all about them.
in fact, i'm the most important part of the job, and i'm aware of that.
my one mistake would be their fall, so if i make an error somewhere, they are doomed.
tell me about your life growing up in yugoslavia.
i'm from the border of montenegro and albania, actually.
i'm 48.
my father was born muslim and a communist.
tito.
he was our idol.
applause
tito and the communist party of yugoslavia declared the republic of yugoslavia in 1945.
people now remember of that period like the golden age.
he was a very authoritarian ruler.
he liked his position.
but he also had a strong sense of what is necessary to do.
yugoslavia... was made by many different nations, different religions, different ethnic groups - we had more than 20 ethnic groups here, and i believe it was very hard to put them all together, and keep that country alive.
singing
as kids, you know, i had in my class alongside gypsy and other, albanian, croatian...
germans, jews, muslims.
it was really amazing.
i only got my first passport when i was 16 or 17, but i couldn't wait for the summer.
in may, the first tourists would come.
germans, french, italian and english would come too and they would go swim naked.
i would sell them coke and beer.
wherever there was an opportunity to peek, to watch naked women,
i would sit down to watch.
my first love was this german woman.
i'm still thinking of her now.
that's how i actually got to learn my german.
see how it's all coming back.
as a young girl, i lived in dimitrovgrad.
it was a small house where my grandmother lived.
bell tolls
but my aunt came for me and my life continued in hamburg, in germany.
german music plays
i had a wonderful time, wonderful.
this is something that remains stamped in my memory.
i was taken by the extravagance and luxury there was.
i thought, "i will become something and somebody in my life.
i couldn't go out that much, as my aunt was a very strict woman.
she was working in yugoslav restaurant and she got me a job to wash dishes and to work at the bar.
i had a chance to meet all kinds of people, and that's how i met my boyfriend.
i was still a child, 17 years old,
i was still a child, 17 years old, and there was some kind of chemistry between us.
and after that, he started giving me all kinds of gifts, perfumes, necklaces, bracelets, and so we got together.
she speaks german
ladies and gentlemen, we would like to inform you about a few things that will be of interest to you during the flight.
i was in love and i was doing everything just to be with him.
it was arranged that we all go to spain, but this was where everything was clear to me - this was a criminal job that he was doing.
when he confessed, i wasn't bothered with it at all.
in fact, i asked him to introduce me to his job so i can be closer to him.
thunder rumbles
i was very anxious, nervous, i wanted to do it, but in that moment, i thought to myself, "how am i going to?
somewhere in the back of my mind i was afraid, but i never showed it.
i would go all or nothing.
and i became the scout, i entered the shop, i recorded where everything is,
i told them.
lela would then simply enter the boutique, and she would register everything, solely with her eyes...
..where everything is, the distances, how far things are, what she thinks can be done, to what extent, who is there... how many of them, how many cameras.
every single detail, she has to cover.
it is only a woman who can do this job properly.
a man would stick out too much.
she can ask for a necklace, she can ask for a ring.
i had a very large hat.
i looked like a real lady.
and i had that ring.
that ring was very expensive.
and i told them that i lost weight and that i came for them to make it smaller.
while they were doing this, i had plenty of time to assess and check out everything around me.
i couldn't see the safe, we call the safe the kitten,
i couldn't locate it, but everything else i had to assess.
when i would go back home, there was a man who would sketch it all based on my story.
he drew it all.
the woman didn't take part in the action.
she gave us the key, gave us information and her part of the job is finished.
most of the time, i felt strong, but i sometimes had a feeling that i was drowning, that everything is falling to pieces...
..but when i would see my boyfriend next to me, it would lift me up.
you have to lock yourself in a room.
you would see other people from the balcony, a girlfriend or a boyfriend walking in the open, we were not allowed to do that.
you would feel a kind of collapse somewhere in your soul.
sometimes nothing, neither money or gold or any kind of wealth would give me as much satisfaction as the mere thought that one day we would go away together and be alone, hope that we will live normal life,
like everyone else.
it took about four months to complete all this planning process...
..and it cost a lot of money.
after all that, i had to disappear because that was the arrangement between us.
i would have beauticians coming to my house, hairdressers, not even he can recognise me sometimes, but he would tell me that i have to do frequent makeovers because of myself and because of the false documents.
that sounds fun and quite glamorous, the transformations.
did you enjoy it?
no, i hated it.
they weren't fun to do because i liked the way i looked, and sometimes those transformations would bother me, like i lost my identity.
i felt like a doll that was experimented on.
tito died in 1980.
it was like my father died, just like my father.
i can't explain the mourning.
they took us to visit his mausoleum
kuca cveca, it's called.
you would have to queue for two days to visit his tomb and pay your tribute - the entire yugoslavia was there.
this is when it all started.
you could sense the separation coming from the point that each republic would have their own president.
milosevic speaks to crowd
the first time i saw milosevic was on television.
i saw him during this big rally in kosovo.
the separation and hatred already started by then.
in every city, there was a national id.
you're a serbian, albanian, this guy's from croatia, you know, from kosovo.
i don't know, great tension - everything was cracking open.
for me, as an albanian in montenegro, the hatred was very visible, just pure hatred.
this is where the huge partition started.
crowd chant
after tito died, separatist groups in different nations of yugoslavia just rose up...
..and they really contributed to the final end of that country... ..to its dismantling.
i think that you'll have to agree that yugoslavia is a pretty spectacular country, and we haven't even seen half of it yet.
tomorrow night, belgrade, the capital of yugoslavia,
sarajevo, the site of the 1984 winter olympics and then, dubrovnik, one of the most exciting, unique and charming little cities in all of the world.
i saw it last night and i can't wait for you to see it, so i'll see you tomorrow night from yugoslavia.
traditional music plays
explosion
gunfire
reporter: 'the ethnically mixed communities of muslims, serbs 'and croats have traditionally lived together in peace...
'..until a majority of the people in bosnia-herzegovina 'voted for independence, 'denying serbia its plans for a newly-formed yugoslavia.'
all the darkness of milosevic's regime left a huge mark on people's soul.
many people just like... ..to the war zones, you know, sent to dubrovnik or bosnia to kill, to rape.
i like this area, i really do.
it's so green.
this is the street where i spent many hours during the '90s, because i was demonstrating against slobodan milosevic and his rule.
it has very strong and very fresh memories.
i mean, just...
we tried to say, "look, it's time for you to go.
you are taking us into total disaster.
it is just interesting to pass here after so many years.
nice treat.
reporter: 'it's time to turn up the pressure on yugoslavia, 'the european community decided today.
'behind closed doors, 'they imposed immediate trade sanctions against yugoslavia, 'and the un security council is to be asked 'to coordinate an oil embargo.'
what we've decided today is to impose sanctions on the whole of yugoslavia.
over time, that will certainly build into an effective pressure.
i don't know how long.
mike:
by the end of '94, it was the core of milosevic' regime and activities.
you know, times were such that you don't know what tomorrow's going to bring.
we all took this rhythm of, "come on, come on,
smuggling everywhere, crime everywhere, nobody thought about real jobs.
i mean, there's no real job.
i had a good deal of money.
when there was a job, cracking safe,
i would go abroad for a month or two.
it was a good job, profitable, you know, we were dancing to the music.
it was the time of turbo-folk music.
every time i hear it, i feel chaos.
she sings in own language
everybody was trying to swindle you, rob you, cheat, it was bare survival - just deceit after deceit.
there was not a single night that somebody wasn't beaten up or killed.
the black market has flourished under the sanctions.
there is a widespread network of illegal dealings in all spheres and it is done with the quiet consent of serbian government.
milena:
it is the truth that crime erupted during the wars, which is usual and expected.
many people became criminals, but not all.
we all had choice.
it wasn't easy, it was difficult.
i could become prostitute or drug smuggler or oil smuggler, but i've not.
thunder rumbles
reporter: 'it's not over yet.
'hundreds were kicked out of kosovo today, literally - 'kicked and beaten at the border 'within sight of freedom.
'and so, the biggest forced exodus in europe goes on 'with enough bitterness to ensure 'that albanians and serbs will find it hard ever to live together again.'
europe couldn't do much, you know, it was getting too big - refugees from bosnia, from kosovo, from croatia...
..and 70% of these refugees went to europe, and so the criminal went to europe, and this is the beginning of pink panther.
milena:
some change just happened in 2000 - a few people started to rob really, really big values.
ok, they are using guns.
this is to scare.
that is the only purpose of gun, but one of their condition is no victims.
they were actually creating the signature of what we know now as pink panthers.
and as one panther said,
after that, you have ten years of very good life.
mike:
so we waited for a festival that was about to take place, and we waited a long time.
it was some kind of a religious thing, a fiesta, music, dancing, just some kind of noise.
that was what we were waiting for - some kind of noise that they couldn't hear us banging through the walls.
because the crooks need time, they're more likely to hit safes on weekends or holidays.
they're clever about finding ways to do it without attracting attention.
there was four of us plus one guy in a van.
we were completely hidden by the people in the street.
fireworks and street chatter
we were all dressed up, we had our masks, bodysuits, completely covered up - you couldn't see us at all, and now the action could begin.
rubble breaks
we only needed to pickaxe the wall.
in the end, there was a hole this big and we squeezed through it into the boutique behind.
we knew everything that was in a glass case was alarmed.
it's a trick.
they always do this.
they alarm cheap stuff like a decoy.
but the real booty is in the save!
so we got to the safe, we try to take it out with the pickaxe...
but we couldn't.
we were looking at it and there was no chance.
then we saw the screws were inside the concrete and we had the idea to lift it up with the car jack.
lucky there was one in the van.
we got out, we took the safe out of the shop and we put it in the van.
people around us, fiesta, fireworks - incredible.
thing is, there's no panic when you do the job.
the panic begins when you run.
but we drove away through the people.
and we went away into the woods.
we got out by a lake, i remember.
somewhere dark, somewhere safe.
somewhere secure.
and then we began to open the safe.
you get the safes that are mechanical, numerical, with locks, and you get the digital ones.
i can crack them all.
digital safes are the easiest to open.
you take some powder and dust them and you can see the fingerprints and you know everything.
numerical ones are the hardest.
you have to use your hearing, you have to have very good hearing and a good memory.
this is very difficult.
but in this case we couldn't open it.
we tried everything.
we made phone calls.
i spoke to another safe expert.
but we gave up that night.
you can't sleep.
you can't sleep, for god's sake.
we're all in this together, we're all friends but with this kind of loot, your brain works on different frequency.
you could have two or three million euros and you don't know what will happen.
i don't know.
money is money, you can't separate.
if one of us is missing, he could take it all.
woman:
i was in the flat on my own.
i was already worrying why they were not back yet.
they didn't call, no phone calls at all because that was the arrangement.
i didn't know what was happening, all kinds of thoughts were going through my head.
i would often cry and i wanted to get out of the flat but i was told not to do that.
sometimes i wouldn't even care about the money.
i waited for him, not the loot.
we had to wait for the morning to buy additional tools that we needed.
we bought two more crowbars, one big, one small, we took another pickaxe and we thought we could do something with burning gas.
and when we had the tools, we went back to the lake.
we were guarding the van outside and inside we could speak and pick until finished.
thunder cracks
it took over an hour to open the safe.
when you open a safe and you see it's a full, full safe...
there's the feeling, it's like, a feeling you might faint any moment.
i love that!
and in this safe there was plenty of stuff.
there was really a lot.
we found six bags that we call rolls.
it was three stones, three bags of stones, two with bracelets and one with watches.
er...
in the newspapers, when it came about the robbery, it said the value three million.
and if i can only say what else we found, inside of the safe!
we found a fake penis!
you say dildo, no?
and i bet you they didn't declare that to the police!
he laughs
what do they do with the jewels?
we don't know exactly.
what we know, the jewels are going very fast out of the country to where they committed the robbery.
the day after, the jewels are disappeared.
we think they are going in italy or in montenegro or serbia and after, it is sold.
so, what do you do with the diamonds?
we bring the stones over here to our contact in belgrade but he doesn't have a market in the former yugoslavia.
he has to sell abroad but maybe, i don't know, antwerp?
we would do this job ourselves but it's very risky abroad because you make an offer, you give it to the guy, they take it and it's a set-up and bang.
you're killed.
no, we stay in the balkans.
translation:
what do you do, then, do you hide it, do you swallow it?
he laughs
they had a false passport and they were about to cross the border very easily, by plane, by car, or by train and for them it was difficult to follow them and to know what they are going to do.
when they go back to the country, there was like a protection, they knew nobody is going to come to montenegro or to serbia to pick them there, even if you have an arrest warrant, because some of them
were involved with the politicians and so it was very difficult, so they knew that as soon as i have made my robbery,
i go back to the country - there i'm protected.
that's right, in the balkans they speak of the pinks like robin hood.
but that's not reality.
normally, about the guys we know, the money they use or they have they're not going to give that for the red cross or... an association in montenegro.
you have some who will reinvest some money in drugs, some who put the money in real estate and some just use the money for fun.
then the pink starts changing.
he starts gambling, going out all the time, the money that we had, we start to rapidly spend it more and more.
and then we start arguing.
i wanted to somehow attract him to live a different kind of life.
i thought perhaps he needs only one more job and he would change.
it would change his life.
but i saw that he wouldn't change for anything or anybody.
he said he wanted me to continue my life and that he didn't know if his life would ever change.
then i gave up on him.
military marching chant
my name is green and i'm from bosnia-herzegovina.
i don't consider myself as one of pink panthers but i am connected.
in 1996, i joined the special operation unit because i knew that the contacts in the serbian security service would allow me job benefits in the future.
my first criminal job in bosnia was importing stolen cars from europe.
the second job was human trafficking for prostitution, predominantly from ukraine and moldova.
so, it is only the third phase that we do drugs, cocaine and diamonds.
nothing in diamonds could be done outside the serb secret service.
america asked the united nations to prevent diamond smuggling because this war in sierra leone was financed by diamond trade.
the americans requested every diamond sold in sierra leone had to have a certificate about its origin and everything, so we actually, my group and myself, learned how to make certificates and how to make clean illegal diamonds that are ready for the market.
the first contract with pink panthers was when i started the diamond business in antwerp.
they would bring diamonds to me and my team would process it, forging diamond certificates and inputting real information from sierra leone that was mined in this and that place and it has original certificates.
the entire genesis, america asked the united nations to establish.
the diamonds are cut, reshaped, but they get smaller.
if it was 30 carats, it is now 15.
they are clean in every sense of the word.
it's not possible to prove they are not clean.
our biggest clients are americans.
i will say, although i've never been to america, my diamonds are on the hands of the brides.
i receive information, al-qaeda also purchase diamonds.
diamonds have a good exchange value because they don't leave electronic trace.
every transaction over 15,000 euros or dollars is controlled.
but who controls diamonds?
nobody.
you can come out with a tiny bag full of diamonds and you can buy a bowl filled with cocaine.
the real... the first step on the real work on the pink panthers is 2007, when monaco pushed interpol to make a project work... to create this project pink panther.
and the real job, for me, began at this time.
because at this time, we began to say, "ok, they are linked,
they are reselling.
a lot of these teams are linked and working in all europe.
and we have to do this project
so we can put all the information together.
if we take one example, this guy, we see that he is connected to this guy because they were arrested together, in 2004.
and at the same time, he is connected with this guy because they have done a robbery together.
because we know that there are, between some groups, like, a small competition - who is going to make the biggest robbery.
and we know that there are some targets in the world and the first one who is going to make that will take... a little bit, like, take the lead on the other teams.
well, the night of the incident, it was just a regular night out, hanging out with some friends.
and i get a call from a friend of mine who informs me that there's a big robbery going on at wafi.
she tells me that her husband's there and he's just sent her, on blackberry, a video shot of what's happening.
confused shouting
i immediately headed out to wafi and i just saw police cordoning off the area around it.
confused shouting
i was standing at the entrance and started clipping pictures and trying to see what's going on and what's happened.
out comes the door - the dubai police chief.
the first words that have come out of his mouth that night was,
these were definitely not arabs.
this was too well-organised.
confused shouting
so what happened?
you went straight to the mall?
yes, i went straight and i meet my commanders, also, in the area.
and we closed the places and we find some glass is on the ground and the evidence from all the things.
and we must be careful about the place and that's what we're doing.
the cars have come out of this main doorway, that's right behind us, drove straight through onto this road which connects them to the outside of the mall and into the highway, where we're going to retrace the route that they've taken, right now.
from this point onwards, to the highway, there are no traffic lights.
so the guys had more or less clear access to the roads.
so the thieves dumped the cars, set fire to them, jumped into their getaway car and now they have disappeared.
the whole thing would have possibly taken them about ten minutes.
next day morning, early morning, the two cars were found abandoned and burnt.
one of them more than the other.
major general:
he closed all the window of the cars.
when he closed the window, there is no oxygen for the fire inside and then we find all the evidence inside this car.
we find the gloves, we find some dress, we find the tanks who have used the chemicals to burn the cars.
immediately, we know this is organised from pink panther organised crimes.
this is what i feel immediately, when i go back to see the cctv camera.
translation:
at that time, every single serbian who has had a record was picked up and questioned.
translation:
so how many people did you have working on the job?
anything.
we don't get a limit for that.
it depended about what the kind of work they will be doing is.
over the next three, four days, it just went frantic.
they kept on feeding information to the interpol, for the international police force to try to get these guys.
translation:
it's not easy for anyone to do any crime and not leave any evidence.
they left evidence, that helped us.
because this is forensics and that's the beauty of dna.
we got information from interpol about the dna.
so we were working.
and we knew that they rented a car.
but this car, nobody knows where this car is.
then we found the car.
we decide that we will not take the car.
we will watch it.
and we find one guy - they try to open the car and we catch him, because that guy, they sent to take the jewels out of the country.
we find the jewellery inside this car.
police, when the arrests were made, called in a huge press conference.
all the media was there, laid out the jewellery in front of everybody and said,
we've caught them, we've nabbed them.
we're done.
and who were the others, then?
you had a picture of the girl.
yes.
but she's not in prison?
no.
she's in serbia, so maybe she cannot be arrested in serbia.
i hope she'll be arrested in serbia.
but i know her.
we tried to discuss this with interpol.
we tried to do so.
so if a member of the pink panther gang watches my film, what is your message?
to be far from our area.
don't try to play with us, because we are not playing.
they had a great period between 2000 and 2006.
and the problem for them, it is that the connection between the different police in europe is a problem for them.
we can exchange information very easily.
and on top of that, with serbia and montenegro now, we have a good connection and they are cooperating with the western police in europe.
so for them, it's going to be harder to commit these robberies in europe.
and that's what interpol said - it's one of the first time they have such a project which gives so much information and who bring us to so many arrests.
since 2007, you have nearly 50 people who were arrested across europe.
is it still safe here?
oh, no, no, no.
montenegro isn't a safe haven any more.
montenegro has started to extradite people because they want to join the european union.
so it's not any more about doing it and escaping.
you have to protect yourself here as much as there.
but, you know, now we lead much more simple lives.
things slowed down and, you know...
now it's becoming more difficult and more dangerous, because the police know all the tricks.
it would be very nice to feel secure, to be in your home - safe.
and this is the consequence of this job - paranoia.
you see, now i walk down the street and my head goes like...
like a rear view mirror, you know?
am i being followed?
does anybody see me?
anybody follow me?
the habit lingers.
even now, in my pocket, i have pills - had pills - just in case.
but crisis throws you back in it.
you are used to a lot of money, lots of fun.
you have a reputation - easy money spent, easy money earned.
it burns quickly, so when you're left with no money, you don't know how to do another job.
intercom buzzes
we have always old teams who work, who try to make new teams, and at the same time, we have brand-new teams.
we have a lot of guys working in all europe.
for me, they're more violent.
already, their entrance in the jeweller's is not so professional and there could be mistakes inside, and that could be more dangerous for us, because the attitude of the bad guys could bring us to a tragic end.
look, i must warn you something - you cannot say the pink panthers' era is over, because you don't know what will happen next.
it is maybe just the end of one generation.
but what is going on with the other teams from other countries that want to do the same?
maybe we are just witnessing the development.
i went back to dimitrovgrad.
bad.
very bad.
i was physically and mentally shaken, and after all that luxury, i was completely broken down.
i was depressed.
but i realised that i have to carry on with my life.
i got married to a man who gave me hope.
he was completely legal.
he wasn't corrupt, he wasn't criminal.
but i finally started a new life with him.
i started a family.
baby gurgles
in my heart, i remain what i was.
milan is the man i love.
but when kids come, you can't choose.
you have one path.
you cannot continue on criminal path.
my mother was very pious and with her,
i would sometimes pray to god before bedtime.
but also in those moments of hardship,
i would often go to church to light a candle, to cry and to think about things.
and do you still believe in god?
yes, yes, of course.
and i teach my children.
of course.
we have to ask for his forgiveness.
and all these people who are criminals, believe me, they believe in god more than regular people.
we have to pray a lot more for his forgiveness.
god is merciful.
and maybe he will.
subtitles by red bee media ltd
__file_terminal__
episode 12 episode 12- you can't enter!
comrade deputy secretary is plotting a conspiracy.
leave.
king lee jae ha is in danger.
i should have given an even bigger gift.
from now onwards, we'll be in charge of the first line of protection.
this way please.
we'll be in charge of the personal protection.
this was decided in the begin
we are the most elite escort guards in the guarding headquarters.
we have always been in charge of protecting the safety of the diplomatic envoys.
because your visit was so sudden, we were unprepared.
now that we are ready, you should receive the proper courtesy.
comrade lee sang yeol is having a secret communication with the outside world.
they want to take advantage of king lee jae ha to create trouble, to intensify the south and north's tension.
thus consolidating the status of the military.
time is pressing.
according to my information, within 2-3 days
how can... something like that happen?
comrade lee sang yeol is normally a rash person.
i'm always tempted to just eat until i become fat.
even i know.
but, he has been loyal to the party for more than 30 years, how can
i can immediately play the content of the recording for you to listen.
place, time and date, he said it all himself
he's definitely joking.
all those foreign media like cnn are all here.
furthermore, the target is the south's king.
a war can be caused if the skin is cut while shaving.
to arrest the king at the people's cultural palace, how is that possible?
nothing will happen.
you don't have to worry.
even if comrade lee sang yeol was more daring, he wouldn't dare touch the south's king.
how did you know it'll be at the people's cultural palace?
comrade, please hand over your gun and retreat.
we are permitted to carry our guns, according to the north and south
even if it's according to the customs, we should be the ones doing the protection.
last time, when the prime minister visited
he isn't the prime minister.
but south korea's king.
what's your position?
guarding headquarters
why?
he's not even qualified to talk to us, what is this?
i only said within 2-3 days,
i never mentioned the place.
according to the itinerary, it is the most important one.
i just roughly guessed it
comrade hyeong, you have also sent people to watch lee sang yeol, right?
you already knew about his plan, right?
are you letting him cause trouble and then use the opportunity to catch him afterwards?
his target is the king!
just as you have just said.
without even saying that a cut on the skin while shaving, even if his finger is pricked with a thorn, it can set off a war.
what attacking of the opposition?
what political power struggle?
this isn't the time to consider your own gains and losses.
if lee jae ha has some unexpected misfortune here, the south and north will become a sea of fire in a moment, don't you know?
by that time, we will lose our lives, comrade chief.
are you comrade lee sang yeol's wife?
where is comrade lee?
comrade lee sang yeol, where is he?
he went out... temporarily.
i don't know how the news leaked, but they have already started.
so... how should we
no matter how difficult the situation gets, we have an obligation to protect our great republic.
you must remember, the motherland definitely won't forget the comrades great vanguard struggle.
we have to start the plan earlier than expected.
he's currently preparing to head north.
don't forget to find out all distant relatives and next-door neighbors address.
send people for an ambush.
don't come in!
doesn't his hyeong guard the command headquarters, or the defense department, or was it the general chief-of-staff?
just start from there.
just start investigating from there.
don't forget to block the train stations and all subway stations in pyeongyang.
yes, okay.
did he run?
what are you talking about?
just then his majesty...
on the way of escorting a political prisoner, something happened.
just to catch lee sang yeol, he let him run, right?
how did you know?
this matter has already been exposed.
the outside world will know about this soon.
before this situation gets bigger, quickly send lee jae ha back to south korea.
tomorrow, no matter what the excuse is,
i'll send him back.
it'll be too late by tomorrow.
you must immediately
there's foreign ambassadors.
it's already such a situation, and you actually want to use south korea's king as publicity?
did you think i will?
this is a matter that the party decided on.
who would have thought that an inexperienced king of the south would take the leadership?
what can we do?
anyway, after the live broadcast of tonight's schedule, i'll send him back.
you don't have to worry.
father!
i think you're really strange.
didn't you end things with lee jae ha already?
is this a normal issue?
lee jae ha is the king.
the south korean king will soon...
lock her up.
father.
the troops have already started moving.
they are now awaiting orders.
i will be responsible for lee jae ha.
just go back.
the area in the park is very big.
would there be difficulty in the protection?
there's a lot of foreign travelers here, furthermore, the security has been increased by three times.
nothing will happen.
triumphant return to youth park?
that place is too wide and there are many places to hide too.
can the protection be done properly?
we are the people's army belonging to the party.
don't mention the amusement park, even if it's the horse race course, we won't even let an ant off.
don't you know that?
you should just forget about the south korean king.
you've already had a miscarriage and he's still busy with work, is he still regarded as a man?
to suddenly appear here, he only brought some creams here in the end
stop talking...
what about me?
can't i say something when it's wrong?
just stop talking...
what you said was right.
he's not a man.
that...
that... can we take a look?
you two can use it.
amazing!
is this really that good?
of course.
look at this, the skin becomes smooth once applied.
this should be very expensive.
forget about him.
this isn't something that you should be worried about, isn't it?
ready?
wow!
why aren't you yelling?
wow!
yell together.
wow!
okay.
wow!
did you take a picture of us yelling?
yes, it is live on the internet.
chief, i definitely won't say that i came here because of you.
no need to be worried.
how is the security around the area?
let's begin.
operation room calling, is the south korean king moving according to plan?
lee jae ha's plan of movement?
after dinner, he'll pass by the merry-go-round.
afterwards he'll return.
i feel a lot better now.
we should have dinner.
what should we eat?
cold radish soup should be pretty good.
otherwise we can eat instant noodles.
that...
don't say anything...
this was at the very bottom.
does the south korean royal family manufacture cosmetics?
handmade by lee jae ha
purified water, purified water... 10 grams.
adapting to an unfamiliar family, a good-for-nothing man, a miscarriage...
for the exhausted gim hang a, a natural 3 staged skincare project.
sorry
i'm sorry.
vitamin.
thank you
thank you.
what should i do?
as a royalty, must i do this?
of course i have to continue.
you horrible person.
you horrible bastard.
i love you.
i love you
give it to me.
no, i want it.
you can take this.
no matter what, i'm still an officer.
do i need to prepare dinner for you too?
come over here.
sorry.
you said you wanted instant noodles, right?
i'm a expert at making it.
i need to go out for a moment.
comrade gim hang a!
if your hands and feet are tied up, you won't be able to eat the noodle that was prepared.
i'll just lock the door when i leave.
you two just need to stay here quietly.
it's been a long time, want to have an actual training?
i still have to ride that?
it's almost-- time to go...
there's just two left.
particularly this merry-go-round, it's one of the facilities that our triumphant return to youth park has the most pride in.
that... is the park's mascot?
it's joseon central television's animal that has been broadcasted for 7 years in the children's movies.
it's tom and jerry.
over here they call it stupid cat and quick rat.
in the comic the cat tom is quite adorable.
this is absolutely the last one.
thank you.
aren't you coming?
this one's a bit... it should be safe.
ah, stress.
to create a natural atmosphere, everyone should go for a ride too.
i'll sit.
good, good.
quickly.
okay, showtime!
what's going on?
over here!
put your guns down.
just try and open fire.
once the person wearing the bomb stops breathing, the bomb will explode.
this one will explode next.
if i die, you will too.
what did i say?
put down your guns!
all of you retreat.
that side, except for that foreign television crew, move back.
move back some more.
move back more!
hey you, focus on me.
recently, the south korean king who holds the flag of unification,
has seduced a pure girl and then abandoned her.
not only that...
very good.
he has trampled on our self-respect.
he even supports--
have the camera focus on lee jae ha for a moment.
i want to see him so scared that he's shivering.
the south korean king, rashly forced his way into our border...
continue contacting that side.
don't let the news spread to her royal highness.
what's going on?
what are you referring to
who did you think was a computer idiot?
what exactly did jae ha encounter in the north?
the north is immediately requesting a military attack against the south--
ah, that's the third time he said that!
did you think this was your scene?
follow the script that i've given to you!
it's almost done, quickly let lee jae ha look at my message!
how do you do?
i don't think you're doing too well.
because you have already been caught.
he's now looking at that, right?
right?
he seems quite scared.
the ones that are currently catching you, are the lunatics from the north.
but, i'm only telling this to you.
that is actually my manipulation.
i...
club m's
john mayer.
i told them not to kill you.
but the people in the north are originally lunatics.
i don't know what they'll do either.
are you ready?
yes.
what to do?
if you just died like that...
jae ha...
what is he trying to pull?
hey!
your earpiece is connected to gim bong gu, right?
give it to me.
this bastard is seriously...
why do you still have things coming out of your belly?
are you doraemon?
he's watching through that, right?
hey.
gim bong gu.
if you want to settle your inferiority complex then do it properly.
what is this?
are you showing the whole world,
what a laughable person you are?
you don't even dare come out, but just send a video.
are you filming section tv?
we got married?
i...
don't love you.
so don't pay so much attention to me.
go do some exercise.
that is the best way to solve an inferiority complex.
kill him.
otherwise go and read a book.
raise your standards.
you overly self-conscious head that's full of inferiority complex, bastard.
kill him!
immediately detonate it!
as long as you don't move,
i won't kill you two.
what is it?
what are you doing?
quickly switch it on.
what's happening?
no one moves!
otherwise, i'll immediately detonate it!
absolutely don't move!
don't move!
we are prepared to die!
do you really want to see the south's king die?
is that gim hang a?
yes.
all of you stay back!
what are you doing?
i want to confirm something with you.
do you... feel that i'm better, or is eun si gyeong better?
i'm not clear about that, but there's someone that i really hate.
lee jae ha?
you know that i hold a grudge, right?
what you just said,
i'll keep using it as revenge.
do you have confidence?
every morning i... will kiss you.
for revenge.
i'll follow you every day like a stalker.
i'll buy you whatever you want.
i absolutely won't have an affair.
i'll just protect you.
in future, i will absolutely won't make you cry.
not even a drop.
i want you to be the happiest queen in the world.
until i die,
i will love only you.
for revenge.
can you handle all of this?
your majesty, the queen.
i'm officially proposing to you at the moment.
do people in the south only know how to be smooth talkers?
the person whom i miss like crazy.
the words that i want to hear you say like crazy.
i love you, i love you, where are you?
the person who engraved a memory deep within me.
it's you.
whether it was a success or failure, haven't we done this?
according to the agreement, quickly send people here.
a chinese passport, 1 million usd and a place to stay in switzerland.
i'll say everything if you don't give them to me.
i'll reveal to the whole world that the ones that plotted this is club m.
okay.
i got it.
they're coming.
confirm the license plate number first.
the number is correct, furthermore there's only 1 car.
lie down!
open fire.
do you have the courage to kill yourself?
ah, did you catch lee sang yeol?
we've always been trying our best to keep korea safe.
informing you of his hideout was merely a small token of our appreciation.
here at club m, we're always trying to keep the peninsula safe and
in east asia, so--
i gave this to father before he died.
if you don't want to die, then work properly.
there's a limit to my patience.
after the live broadcast on the internet last night,
cnn has formally reported on the king's hostage incident.
the report said that the woc north korean officers played a key role in rescuing his majesty.
why didn't they report about us?
we express our apologies for not being able to safely protect the south's king lee jae ha during his visit to our side.
why is their attitude so docile?
what are they planning?
didn't cnn do a complete report?
they probably feel they are also passive.
is this your credit?
it's the king that eased the tension.
among the king's incident, the citizens are talking about who gim bong gu is.
thus the royal family's chief secretary has come out to give a public explanation.
gim bong gu isn't a specific figure.
it's the name given by his majesty to the collective parties opposed to the peace between the north and south.
a kind of catch-phrase.
among this incident, our royal family would like to express its regret towards the innocent people whohave suffered as a result of the recent events by gim bong gu.
that is all.
i've stalled the media first, you were too careless.
did you find the tablet with gim bong gu's video?
yes.
what can we do even if we found it?
presently, we have no power.
regarding the media speculations, we can only decline to comment.
but everyone knows that gim bong gu is john mayer.
do you know why we are not taking any action?
because of his provocative words, it could start a war.
although john mayer does not expose himself now, even the politicians from china and the united states don't dare intervene fearing retribution.
he has bribed many politicians and then used this as a handle to manipulate them.
but his behavior goes very well with these countries interest.
whether it's arms dealer club m or the surrounding countries, peace between the south and north isn't what they want to see.
then when do you want me to be frightened till?
they killed hyeong, crippled jae sin and even threatened me, how can
your majesty, aren't you afraid that's why you're like this?
you should be very clear, right?
you can't endure all this.
that's why you dared to shout towards cnn that this is club m's gim bong gu's doing, right?
your majesty, it's time for us to leave.
long live!
long live the king!
take care.
regarding this incident, i express my apologies again.
do you know gim bong gu?
it looks like you know as well.
i hope we can become stronger together.
father, i really have to go this time.
whether you go or not, whatever i say you'll still go.
can i interfere?
it's father?
father, after the mid-autumn festival jongmyo worshiping, i'll come back together with hang a. (jongmyo
royal ancestral shrine)
it's okay, once you come you cause a lot troubles.
i feel a bit annoyed at that.
recently, it's popular in the south that after visiting the husbands family we'll immediately visit the wifes family during mid-autumn festival.
as the south korea's king, i should keep up with the times.
i'll see you then, father.
i'll definitely come.
your expression is obviously mixed.
i heard that my mom cooked kelp soup to wait for you.
aren't you being too much?
i'm still a bit afraid.
how should i face the citizens?
you must have suffered a lot.
i feel really apologetic and grateful to you.
your royal highness, let me pay my respects to your first.
forget it, what are you paying your respects for?
there are no outsiders here.
furthermore, i should be the one paying my respects to you.
you saved my son.
come here, i have something to show you.
it's gifts that the citizens sent.
and inside this is the food that was sent here.
they sent a lot here, but we are able to put them all away.
this is kelp, you know it, right?
it can help you replenish your body.
you need to slowly eat them all.
you can open your presents, while taking a rest.
okay.
go to hell, gim hang a
why is this here?
someone sent it over.
i'm thinking of writing a letter to convince him.
it's all right.
but these are all from south korea.
no, the citizens of south korea sent these over?
to be given such gifts are a common occurrence.
gim hang a's popularity seems to be rising.
but there are still more than half of the citizens expressing worry.
ajussi.
do you have to say this now?
we just came back.
and there are already enough gifts already.
in the past, when father was critically ill, there was only half the amount of gifts.
i hope you're not too ecstatic.
i'm not ecstatic.
just like eun si gyeong, inflexible.
when people are in a good mood, you pour cold water on them.
i know now is just the beginning.
i will work hard to accumulate it.
you mention before some kind of... power.
i have received the information from club m.
we will also be caution with the information, you should also
yes i know.
but was there any witness when the late king passed away?
how is the princess?
did you see her with you own eyes?
seriously, hurry.
information which i sent you is not important.
we need definite proof, so that we can hit john mayer.
again, again.
you're here?
before listening to the north's story, let's play this together.
the princess' memory is the most important factor.
during the time that i wasn't here, were you just playing that?
what's wrong?
this isn't gambling.
just for entertainment.
game.
so, only know how to play.
undergo the treatment yet?
did you put in any effort to try and recover your memory?
i went to the physical therapy and meditation as well as psychotherapy this morning.
i had a bit free time just then, so we played a game for a while.
what's the problem?
you're thinking of expressing how much hardships you went through in the north?
while oppa and eonni are suffering, i'm here playing games, (oppa - older brother, boyfriend.
eonni - older sister) so you're trying to lecture me now?
meditation and psychotherapy are the basic treatments.
so have you recalled anything?
memory isn't by forcing people, there will be
exactly... why are you like this?
do you know what i'm going through now?
i can't go out.
suddenly waking up during sleep.
still have to suffer under others threats.
what can i still do
so you want others to pity you?
aren't you deliberately trying not to recall your memories?
hey...
eun si gyeong.
you don't want to recall it.
lower half of body is paralyzed.
this kind of people, whoever sees it will take pity on them.
because of pity, they should even be more caring towards you.
you're wrong.
princess, you're currently giving up on yourself.
the same with your memory.
even you really can't remember, it's all right.
but... please don't hide.
return to the original you.
princess.
please go back to your original self.
the upright and dignified you.
i'm lee jae sin.
change my personal bodyguard.
as long as it's not eun si gyeong, it's fine.
help me change another person here.
right now.
uninteresting bastard.
is that okay?
his lovers name is dara.
dara...
she goes in and out of here often, right?
good, there's even the place that bong gu goes to often.
is it confirmed that it's here?
this person, really is... uninteresting.
uninteresting frustrating person.
uninteresting bastard.
hey, eun si gyeong, eun si gyeong.
your majesty...
am i that uninteresting?
you're not the quick-witted type.
it's correct that bong gu often goes to that place.
although i'm a bit uninteresting, please trust me.
are you angry?
also the manipulator behind the scenes of the incident at the north's theme park, has already been confirmed that it's bong gu.
the hiding place of the person who manipulated the incident, is at club m telling minister gim nam il.
afraid to be discovered, he'll give up on his gains to survive.
so, what is the north going to do?
although very angry, they'll have wait and see attitude.
if bong gu can pass through china to start an economic blockade
they'll be dead for sure.
the north.
then the murderer is...
john mayer.
his korean name is gim bong gu.
how can he be so daring?
that guy actually dared to kill the former king, and drive a wedge between the south and north.
now he's also causing trouble in the north.
he is one person, but he's not alone.
he has a lot of money.
to an unthinkable degree.
he bought everything with money.
all of it.
newspaper, news reports and even movies.
using civil war, our country will rely on a strong country to calm the war.
there's only one theme.
power is justice.
these outrageous mindset cheap movies.
what cheap?
it's a very sharp movie.
you all appear often as well.
but on the contrary...
i've seen it before.
said it's pyeongyang, but it was a coconut tree planted on the roadside.
if it's just those people, they must be dealt with whatever the cost.
as you know, the surrounding countries don't want us to become too strong.
the north and south must remain in conflict.
that's their hope.
the world is so big, there are much more things to be done.
we're too small.
can we do it?
woc and getting married?
what's going on?
are we not getting married?
is that what you're saying?
that's not what i meant.
of course we have to get married.
it's just that the road is full of difficulties and obstacles
you bastard.
who was just saying that they were doing everything so that we could get married?
what's with this?
so, when things get too hard, you want to call it quits?
if you're like this still, it'll be the third time, you know?
no we will, we must
say we do, what happens then?
isn't that brat still making a movie?
conspiracy to murder, wreaking chaos, even causing the death of my unborn child.
why can you still be like this?
we'll do it, straight away.
when?
next month?
first come up with a plan to do away with that brat.
if you can't handle that person called bong gu or yeong gu, you... are not even a man.
why would i marry such a person?
i will reject you.
i will do well.
i'll have him under my feet.
hello?
father.
you must know,
club m's gim bong gu.
what exactly are you doing?
you bastard, in the middle of the night, why did you suddenly
but... how did you know?
it caused comrade lee jae ha to tremble.
even if there's an atomic bomb explosion, he can still carry on sleeping.
who dares?
for making my man become like this.
i will not let him go.
i wish i could go now and wring that bastard's neck.
calm down.
even if you don't do it,
i will still carry out the investigation.
don't just investigate.
act on it.
firstly, tell me where does that guy live?
now lee jae ha's plans can be put to use.
what plan?
how to do it?
what?
i'm sorry.
i can't discuss the matters with you.
i beg you to follow what i have told you to do.
this fellow, since when did the south turn her over to their side?
are you ready?
yes.
thank you for your co-operation.
as you know, please help us keep this confidential.
therefore, before 2 am don't let anyone come in.
okay, i understand.
that woman is here in the bar now, right?
good.
you understand, right?
this is only just a plan.
i only love my hang a.
only gim hang a.
if hang a says something, you must be my witness.
who are you?
i rented this place out tonight.
me too.
we have a surprise.
what?
we've just received a present from the korean royal family.
how did they know i was here?
are you sure the royal family sent it?
well, there's a-- there's a royal seal on it and we've had it counterfeit tested and it all seems to be legitimate.
mr. gim bong gu.
although i've sent this gift to you, it's best that you don't open it.
you will need to know the keyword to open it.
opening it won't be easy.
i've suffered a lot in order to open my hyeong's ilseongnok.
i don't want to see you suffer too.
but if you must know,
i'll give you a hint.
the keyword is one word.
i have it, but you don't have it.
but i sincerely advise you... don't open it.
you'll regret it.
he's just trying to create confusion.
ignore it.
i will send it back then.
no.
bring it here.
doesn't he want to play with me?
then i'll accompany him.
he's just a little child after all.
please say the keyword.
the keyword is one word.
i have it, but you don't have it.
imperial jade seal?
royal prince.
appearance.
that's right.
in appearance, you and i look pretty much the same.
honor.
this is not possible, absolutely not possible.
didn't you say it before?
once i have the confidence to settle it, i can just come find you.
now is the time.
but your majesty, that is already
i want to do it together with hang a.
no matter how i think, there's no other options left.
please help me, ajussi.
youth.
your palace, is just a bit bigger than a sesame.
rank?
no, you don't have that either.
cancel it.
i already said cancel it!
south korean passport.
nationality.
imperial robe.
dress.
crown.
etiquette.
morals.
manners.
conscience.
take this with you.
i don't care if you use an axe or use a hammer...
just open it.
the king's fiancée miss gim hang a,
will participate with the king in today's concert.
this will be miss gim hang a's first public appearance,
since the passing of the previous king.
furthermore, it's her first appearance together with the king.
therefore, there has been much speculation that the royal family may make a significant announcement.
there is a device.
and due to the wavelength dispersion, an x-ray can't even pick it up.
even if you open it, it's designed to explode.
i'll...
i'll get rid of it.
it's not really the time to be dealing with something like this anyway.
bring it here.
i won't get excited.
i will quietly analyse that brat's intentions.
are you ready?
people.
next episode preview
that bastard gim bong gu, how did he go there?
he is a powerful bastard.
he has a very strong power.
from now on, there won't be a club m that hides behind the curtains anymore.
peace.
korea.
now, the princess' memories are our only weapon.
i'm doing this for oppa.
i need you.
that chief secretary...
he can be trusted, right?
hyeong stayed at the villa, only several people knew in advance.
are you saying there's a traitor?
real revenge isn't to a person like you.
you know what this is, right?
mom.
thank you.
__file_terminal__
episode 13
people.
that brat.
is this a tooth for a tooth?
a video message as well?
he just has this capability.
you opened it.
you didn't listen to my advice.
fine.
with an open mind, i'll give you the last chance.
turn this off right now.
if you don't turn this off by the time i count to 10,
you'll really regret it.
1, 2,
he really knows how to do a deceptive talk.
3, 4,
is this the 19 banned movies?
5, 6, 7, 8,
9...
10.
you really want to continue watching, right?
fine.
you talk very funny.
let's leave.
it's too late.
it's only 2 in the morning.
you said you have boyfriend, right?
isn't he waiting for you in the room?
i came here alone.
what do you mean by boyfriend?
he's not even my boyfriend.
you know, i'm only just playing around for fun.
he has no charm, no humor.
and every night, he shows me his magical tricks.
it's just so childish.
i give him this weird look to stop but he doesn't understand.
he's so fickle...
and has this extreme inferiority complex.
still, he calls himself the king.
king?
yes!
he's got money, that's why i'm with him.
you and i know that that's the way the world works.
but it doesn't get rid of the disgust.
can money really buy you dignity and intelligence?
of course, it can't.
what are you doing all day?
why don't you sleep?
anyway,
let's have fun.
let's talk about something interesting.
i have a better place.
it couldn't be that you've already killed that woman, right?
those opinions that she had of you,
you should have already known.
aren't people like that?
lying and being cheated.
and deliberately being cheated.
i was also like that in the beginning,
with hang a.
even to the point that i shot her.
fortunately, it was just a blank ammunition.
otherwise...
it was hyeong who saved me.
afterwards, because of hang a's trust in me,
i'm able to live again.
so i hope that,
you can let her off this one time too.
if not, you'll become extremely lonely.
at the very least, i still have people who believe in me, so i'm able to start all over.
but you don't have any.
not even one.
if you cross that line,
and really kill me,
you'll be finished.
despair... endless despair.
when a person is alive, the most important thing is
people.
therefore, my courage and strength,
are those people.
the people who believes in me.
even if i push them aside, the people would still help me.
even if i point a gun at them, they will still love me.
therefore, gim bong gu,
you can try to trample me again,
but that'll only make me stronger.
why?
because those people believe in me,
i must protect them now.
only when i become stronger--
well... it looks like lee jae ha is gonna make an announcement.
mourning speech of the former king
the former king, my hyeong, has always had a wish that was unfulfilled when he was alive.
woc, where the south and north can participate as a unified team.
as well as my wedding with gim hang a.
i will adhere to his final wishes
and participate in the woc that's taking place in a month.
the team will be the same as before.
of course, i'll also be included.
are we... participating too?
together with the officers from the north, i have already received the training 5 months ago and received a high evaluation.
furthermore, not long ago during the critical moment, the team spirit between the south and north has also gotten the verification.
we will definitely pass to the second round.
if we get eliminated before the second round, the marriage with the north will be cancelled.
as many of you know, i love gim hang a.
but for a king to have an engagement with a north korean officer, what decency is there?
i understand that every citizen is worried.
therefore i'll prove everything.
with woc, i'll prove the trust between us.
furthermore, the big effect that the south and north cooperation will bring,
i'll also let everyone witness it.
to reach the former king's unfulfilled wish,
as well as my engagement, i'll gain everyone's most sincere approval.
next, i invite the south and north representative's team leader,
who is also the fiancée that i love.
gim hang a.
call... the advisers.
how can this be possible?
how can your majesty personally participate?
that is a place that officers from each country will have a contest of their military strength.
this is no difference from a small scaled war.
there are many kings who participated in war.
alexander the great and genghis khan did too.
we have gwanggaeto the great and king jangsu.
that was all in the past.
kennedy is also the same.
didn't you know that he personally commanded a battle?
that was an emergency.
it's an emergency now too.
i'm not going there to play, it's a diplomatic activity.
we are located in an important position in east asia.
america, china, japan and russia are all paying close attention to the situation between the south and north.
we have always been surrounded.
that's why i'm participating to fight for leadership.
shut up all of you, we will make decisions on our matters ourselves!
we need to tell them that.
you should say something!
what are you going to do, if you get hurt?
i won't get hurt.
there's no live ammunition in the guns, how can
anyways, the competitors will pay close attention.
that is the king.
what will we do if he gets hurt?
something big will happen if he does.
when that time comes, you have to cooperate with me and start bragging.
what are you going to do if you lose?
that's right.
what will you if you get eliminated in the first round?
this will become an international joke, we'll be a laughing stock.
not just you, your majesty, but the whole country as well.
there'll be no problem till the second round.
we have looked at our opponents' analysis of combat effectiveness.
here.
but even if i tell you, you wouldn't understand.
you never served the army.
how's your blood pressure?
if it's so serious that you have to take medicine before you go to sleep, you should quit smoking and drinking.
could it be that you didn't quit either of those?
you probably never exercised either, right?
i have a rich man's disease.
normally my blood pressure is very normal, but my blood pressure tends to be elevated when it's getting measured.
it's known as white coat hypertension.
is that so?
it just so happens that the attending doctor is here, let's call him here to measure your blood pressure.
pay attention to your safety when you participate in the woc.
during the time that you aren't here, i'll protect the country.
you don't need to guard my position.
there are 273 people in line, who have the rights to inherit the throne, so you don't have to worry.
i'll organize the regency forms.
first in line to inherit, princess lee jae sin.
i'm not that skilled in my driving skills yet.
why?
do you want to hear me say sorry?
from a disabled person?
no.
just for a month.
no, eonni.
i can't.
during the time that we are participating in the woc, just for a month.
you know that i can't even go outside.
i can't do it.
i absolutely can't make public appearances.
i'll do it.
i'll do it on her behalf.
there are currently different views from just participating in the woc.
according to succession, the throne goes to the princess.
if you don't make an appearance during the time that his majesty isn't here, the pressures from all sides will become a threat to the royal family.
therefore, why did you two participate in the woc?
you saved oppa and your popularity rises, so you want to continue being handsome?
just stay here obediently and get engaged.
why did you attract this kind of thing?
am i doing this for myself?
your highness, can you step out for a moment?
i'll talk quietly to princess
no, mom.
eonni doesn't hide her temper.
mom, if you leave, some thing will happen.
last time, she hit and threw me.
threw... when did i?
except for washing you, i didn't do anything else.
talk another time, hang a.
talk another time.
you know that she's not in a good condition at the moment.
it was just a wash...
you're going to the hospital, right?
i'll go with you.
why did you wear these?
a normal person wearing these will wear the leather.
you're already sitting in a wheelchair, how can you wear this kind of shoes?
i don't need it.
wear this.
by wearing this, your feet will be a lot more comfortable.
that's enough, just move aside!
since i'm like this already.
the last time you went to the hospital, i know what you have experienced.
actually, i heard it from eun si gyeong.
but it's all right, i'm here to protect you.
you know my abilities, right?
stop trying to be funny.
don't you still have to be like oppa and play around with your power?
here.
no, jae ha.
jae sin really
no matter what, the first successor must be in charge.
that way, other people won't infringe the royal family.
you know of her current condition as well.
ever since her legs have been paralyzed, she
even so, she still has to do it.
no matter how much you protect her
i'm not protecting her.
it's that i know how bad her situation is.
i always hear knocking sounds on the walls every night.
when i opened the door, i saw her hitting her head against the wall.
saying that she didn't know why she was like this.
saying that she was afraid.
always hearing a strange song in her ears.
always dreaming of being chased.
she's scared in her dreams and she's also scared when she wakes up.
this can't continue, she needs to overcome those memories.
she can't even take care of herself, what are you so urgently getting her to remember?
also, how can you give the regency to her?
she can't even walk anymore.
and you're making her run, does that make sense?
she is currently educating her.
hang a.
what?
didn't she go to the hospital?
she is able to run, jae sin.
does she always eat mood stabilizers like this?
it may be because she feels tired, so they carry it with them all the time.
she's so weak, what can she do?
the princess is crazy, how can the royal family announce the paralysis of her lower body?
people would not believe this.
jae sin keeps on hiding herself.
so people will only think that she's crazy.
you're actually doing useless things.
there's finally a problem.
she's locked at the basement, and screaming hysterically.
chewing on her own clothes, eating filthy things.
stop it!
she drools and defecates uncontrollably, and she rubs them against the wall.
what are you getting at?
how can you speak of your dongsaeng like this?
regardless of what other people say, how can you talk like that about your own dongsaeng?
it's because i didn't want to hear anyone saying it, that's why i had to do it.
before, our jae sin was smart, strong, good at singing in front of others.
that's why you should let her step forward.
we must grab hold of jae sin to return her to the person she once was!
the scoundrel that murdered hyeong, and crippled jae sin, can we let him off?
mom.
this is the gift sent by king lee jae ha of the republic of korea.
he said that i've no talented people by my side.
yes, he's correct.
i really don't have anyone by my side who's able to convince me.
this is my fault.
our ancestors also said that there are things worth learning from our enemies.
so, from today onwards, i want to become a symbol of peace.
our club m will be committed to peace and prosperity in the future.
as the 1st step,
i will personally attend the forum at the south of jeju on peace on the peninsula.
do you mean you're actually gonna go there?
that's right.
the club m that used to work behind the scenes has ceased to exist.
all the staff officers who were controlling from behind the scenes, and the lazy john mayer also no longer exists.
because of peace,
king lee jae ha took the lead in joining the woc.
i will use him as a role model and lead my homeland, the korean peninsula.
heading towards peace.
peace.
korea.
club m's john mayer's real name is gim bong gu.
it is said that he personally came to see the former king.
he said that he was very sad and even had a meal with me.
i heard it myself.
what did you hear?
i personally sent him to the next life, bastard.
you know, he died not knowing anything at all.
just like a fool.
he drank the wine... confused alcohol with fatigue.
he said that he killed hyeong.
because of woc and the facilitating relationships between the north and south.
he's one with a lot of power.
i've investigated the power he possess, and it's very terrifying.
there's nothing he's afraid of.
who was hyeong?
he was a king!
but he actually did that to hyeong and jae sin.
so mom, i also want to be strong.
in order to deal with him, you and jae sin
don't.
let's not bother about him, and just avoid him.
jae ha, let's just avoid him!
mom!
didn't you say there's nothing he's afraid of?
then why do you want to challenge him?
jae ha, you can't...
losing jae gang is enough.
you can't.
don't bother about that kind of person.
before jae gang was your hyeong, he was my son.
i have decided to forgive everything, so let me bury it all deep in my heart, and let us compromise a little.
just close one eye and take it like nothing has happened.
jae ha, please save me...
jae ha, you can't!
i don't want to lose you again.
no, jae ha, you can't!
jae ha, my son, you can't!
mom...
no, no, no...
he hated it the most when woc united the north and south.
so, if we were to join the woc, won't it be definite that he will continue creating trouble for the royal family?
that's why we need the princess.
at least if we follow principles and orders, he will be more astringent.
but more importantly, remember.
if we want to stop him, we will need a weapon.
as of now,
the princess's memory of what happened then can be used to testify, and it's our only weapon.
so, you must remember, please.
that's true.
i never thought that it would be simple.
she has changed too much, too much.
the first time i saw her, she was full of confidence.
i just don't know what exactly happened when the former king passed away.
but, how did bong gu know of that place?
you mean the place hyeong went for vacation?
their intelligence information level is really high.
no, only a few people knew about that place.
how did he know?
who are those who knew about that place?
our family, the chief secretary, eun si gyeong, the safety inspection team and only a few guards.
that chief secretary...
he can be trusted, right?
hey, you can't suspect the chief secretary even if you want to suspect others.
for 30 years... he has been in the palace for 30 years, even before i was born.
he told me something very strange last time.
the public trial by the south was you, lee jae ha, no...
it was your majesty who let me go.
me?
no.
then, was that what you've thought all along?
no.
after that, the chief secretary told me that he had lied to me then.
hang a, said she'll go?
yes, when i went, she had already decided.
the undc meeting has indicated that it is okay for the north and south joint team to participate.
but, six countries including the united states, china, russia, japan and others have expressed their concerns about the safety of the woc.
our administration department also feels that
ajussi.
ajussi, you wouldn't lie to me right?
no.
aigoo, this looks like it hasn't been wiped.
i've told the cleaner to help me wipe off the coffee stain.
he takes so much pride in his work and i can't deal a blow to his enthusiasm.
looks like as you age, your memory will worsen, isn't that right?
yes, that
ajussi, you'll also be like that right?
the safety check last time, the place where my hyeong passed away.
fireplace.
yes.
it was my negligence.
was it because of your memory?
i heard that the un are very grateful for the welcome.
i will continue to persuade jae sin, you can leave.
just for a month.
during the time that we are participating in the woc, just for a month.
what terminator?
actually ri gang seok likes girls' generation's tiffany!
he's a sasaeng fan, sasaeng fan.
in the army, girls' generation are like goddesses.
exactly.
as long as there's a television program of girls' generation, our fighting strength doubles.
no, no...
ri gang seok doesn't have much strength.
when he was walking around north korea with that ipc-7, he was really showing off.
you could tell it from looking at his wrinkled face.
so, did you slip away during a snowball fight once you saw ri gang seok coming?
because you were frightened by his wrinkled face?
i'm only showing respect to my elders.
aren't we a country of the most courteous people in the east?
i think you only know how to talk smoothly.
you actually used violence in the army!
and you're the captain!
captain, you're too cunning.
what are all of you looking at standing there?
should i stand up and dance for you?
i'll do it.
i'll replace oppa.
i'll be the on the throne for one month.
but i have a condition.
i need you.
you also know that i want to go to woc.
someone else can replace you to go to woc.
we have captains who are more outstanding than you who can go.
but i'm also one of the team members.
we have already trained together before
do you want me to kneel and beg you?
i beg you to help me." is it like this?
if i were to do it, will you agree?
there are rumors outside the palace saying that both my legs are disabled and i have gone mad.
even though there is such gossip,
i'm still the princess.
but why do i have to be so humble towards you?
i feel that you're really uninteresting and boring, i don't even wish to see you.
but not anymore.
even oppa and eonni have gone to woc.
there isn't anyone i can depend on.
although it makes me seem very pitiful saying this to you...
remain here, please.
i will report to his majesty.
but...
i really can't remember.
it's not that i can't remember it deliberately, and i'm also not hiding from it,
but it's that i really can't remember even though i've tried very hard
i know.
at that time, i...
i'm very sorry, princess.
you're saying what jae sin said personally?
she told you personally that she will accept being the regent?
yes.
so i may have to be absent from woc.
what's your trade secret?
from gim hang a to jae sin,
how did you seduce them?
don't tell me your nature is a royal killer?
i have not seduced them.
this woman's love is really unique.
if things go well, you could have been the royal son-in-law now.
why is it you?
you don't know right?
the fantasy i have for my future brother-in-law.
he must be easy to communicate with and must be humorous, he must be able to play golf and go out and have fun with me, and we can accumulate friendship
but you
i also have no intention.
the princess is not the type i like, so you don't have to worry.
i understand.
if you're not willing then forget it.
hey, but why is it you can't joke?
and, what's your type?
with jae sin's standard
if you have nothing else to say, i'll take my leave.
hey, hey, i'm not done talking and you're leaving?
then, you better hurry up and find someone to replace you.
the villa that my hyeong went to, there were some people who knew beforehand, right?
investigate it.
maybe someone leaked the information.
are you saying that there's a traitor among us?
the safety inspection team, guards, the commander of the unit you're in and the chief secretary
anyway, i want you to investigate all of them, everyone except my family.
on tuesday morning, there's a ceremony regarding contributions for the red cross.
it is expected to take about an hour.
i'm not going.
in the afternoon, you have to go for a walk with the public at namsan's pine wood trail.
my mother will go on my behalf.
this has already been reduced.
but...
chief secretary, for the contributions, you can see what to do about it, and as for going for a walk at namsan's pine wood trail, you also know...
it's impossible for me to go.
if the queen dowager goes, the citizens will be very happy.
although i may participate in paying respects to the memorial hospital, it must not be made public.
there must not be any reporters.
starting on wednesday, the forum in jeju for peace on the peninsula will begin.
although it is not necessary for you to go to jeju personally, but there's a royal family dinner.
that also...
the whole world's political and business vips will be present.
it's a dinner organized by the royal family, how can the host not go after inviting guests over?
the current armistice agreement that uses ceasefire as the main topic to change it into a peace agreement, is the most important topic at this forum.
for the peace of our country, the atmosphere for international public opinions is necessary.
so, you must definitely attend.
this is the list of those participating in the royal family dinner.
what is this?
club m's john mayer is coming?
yes, the news was sent just now.
he will personally attend the jeju forum.
why did he suddenly
that...
but isn't it better if he comes?
the security of the jeju forum will be tight.
there is an uproar of news circulating among the foreign media saying that john mayer is finally going to reveal his true self.
i understand, you can go out.
are you busy?
i have something to ask you.
what is it?
it's regarding the place where the former king passed away.
there are some inconsistencies with what the security team said.
anmyeondo?
why are you checking this?
that... the 1st report received said that the fireplace had already been inspected.
but then, in the new report handed over, there was an amendment.
i asked you why you have to investigate this?
it's because his majesty would like to know.
he feels that there may be a traitor among us.
so, is he only letting you investigate?
or
although he told me directly, but i think he intends to find someone to discuss with.
who must be investigated?
everyone else except for members of the royal family.
that's what he said.
ajussi, you wouldn't lie to me right?
even though that's what he said, he wouldn't include father.
his majesty trusts father so much.
yes, your majesty.
you've come.
tailor, you can go, you've worked hard.
it's good looking right?
especially this yellow armband.
is it not that good?
that's right,
i'm just a sergeant, but i've become the team leader.
but no matter what, i'm still the king,
i've the highest command in the army.
how can i say "yes, team leader!" to the captain?
won't it be very strange?
john mayer is coming.
he said he wants to personally attend the forum at jeju on peace on the peninsula.
i knew he wouldn't just stay put simple-mindedly.
but i thought he would manipulate the un to prevent the woc competition.
i didn't expect him not to do so.
he will also come for the royal family dinner.
this is the only activity the princess will be participating that will be made public.
do you really plan to just leave like that?
that's an official activity.
with so many people in the surrounding watching him, he wouldn't dare to create trouble.
even so
furthermore, ajussi will be there.
i'll rely on you to take care of jae sin.
i believe in you, ajussi.
you're here?
the competition is the day after tomorrow, what are you still doing here?
you should quickly go and train your physical strength.
teamwork must be consolidated first.
we're going to compete soon.
fighting!
don't i look very pretty like this?
okay, although i lost to my first love by a huge difference.
oh... your first love?
before we consolidate teamwork, you should bear with a beating once.
it's a fact, what do you expect me to do?
she was so beautiful.
i know, i know.
sit down.
but, she was really arrogant, and extremely capable.
come and catch me!
this is great!
it's mine now.
no, it's mine!
let me help you.
my mother sent me to an ordinary school.
initially, it was to keep my royal identity a secret.
anyway,
i particularly liked her.
including that overly coolness of hers.
but even if we purposely concealed my identity, in the end we still couldn't contain it.
news started spreading even before the third day.
let's take a photo together.
from that day onwards, her attitude took a 180 degree turn.
she safely got close to me and pulled on my arm suddenly.
it was a little... scary.
other people's first loves are gentle and quiet.
and they want to keep it for an entire lifetime.
but i'm unclear about it.
i just... want to forget about it.
the truth is, i valued my title as a royalty too much.
other children are also like this.
from then on, i gave up.
it was like that originally.
that person and this world were all like this originally.
i enjoyed it even though i gave up.
even if you met someone you liked, you couldn't go ahead.
drawing a clear boundary, and mutual distrust.
but this kind of life... people will really
become lonely.
thank you for being able to be by my side.
we must certainly win till the end.
his majesty, king lee jae ha arrived in japan at 1pm today.
in the next month, he will be the team leader for the joint officer team of the north and south, and compete against the officers from 16 countries attending the third woc.
the spokesperson for the un military meeting as well as the local governor welcomed them.
nice to meet you.
nice to meet you too.
i am from now on, not a king of south korea, but a team leader of the joint south and the north korea team.
so, too much privilege is bad for me.
yes, your highness.
we haven't started but you've launched the contest.
could it be that this contest is aimed at letting the self-defense forces to gain approval?
your highness, please.
king lee jae ha has announced that during the woc elimination competition, if he is unable to proceed to the second round, he will not fulfill the engagement agreement with north korea's gim hang a.
these are the official woc sport shoes and the headquarters entrance certification.
as for the schedule, you just need to read it carefully
have the other teams arrived?
we have come a bit late, other team members have already completed the adaptation training a month ago.
have the north's people arrived?
hello.
i'm korean people's army's defense department's first lieutenant, ri gang seok.
hello.
i'm from the tactical operations department of the korean people's army, gwon yeong bae.
hey, you'll create a strange tension, what's wrong with you guys?
it's nothing, please give an order, we will put in our utmost efforts.
forget everything about me being the king!
courtesy is not necessary, if not we will fall behind on the second round of the competition!
it is important for the team to cooperate.
so just be more casual.
is that right?
i'm so happy to see you.
comrade lee jae ha.
yeong bae!
hey!
wait, wait.
looking at your happy appearance, being the king looks not too bad.
hey!
you're really...
i also didn't let you take it too far.
comrade gim hang a, are you living well?
what's wrong with you?
have you gone crazy?
hey, you look like you put on weight, didn't you train?
but why did your face age so much?
according to that stomach of yours, it's going to be hard to play!
stomach full of fat, and you aren't worried other countries may joke about it.
that's right, the ruler of the country having fat all around his waist.
their relationship is so close, it looks good right?
eun gyu tae has been trying to contact us, he wants to meet you.
don't mind him.
just let him continue being anxious for a while.
now he should be able to see that we are teasing lee jae sin.
the royal committee, in accordance with article 14 section 2 of the royal family act, hereby selects princess lee jae sin for inheritance.
within the next month, she will replace king lee jae ha and carry out associate work.
are you willing to accept this?
yes.
why is it my introduction letter only has these?
am i not comparable with the fellow who won the nobel prize?
i can't even be compared with this former president.
as you know... characteristics of the media.
always chasing what you already know.
the people in the know realize the significance of john mayer's attendance.
if they want to welcome me, they should also be at the grade of the palace of versailles.
we keep stopping at every building.
is there a place to stop the car here?
are you really gonna leave out woc?
did you not hear what i said?
i'm reborn.
i've become the john mayer who likes peace.
lee jae ha, he actually participated in the competition.
and if they pass the first round, and he gets married...
why?
isn't it very touching?
in order to accomplish in his hyeong's wishes, he entered the battlefield.
forget it if you're not helping him, yet you still want to obstruct him.
is that something a person should do?
lee jae ha really causes people to shed tears.
but...
i've already said that three points is based on skill while the other seven is based on luck.
this north and south team will need to have good luck.
will they?
ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the world officers championship.
i would like to thank the participants...
from brazil, egypt...
who are we competing against in the first round?
who are the candidates?
the easiest to handle is...
italy.
the soldiers are great, but not the officers.
but then, the lightning army group is very famous.
don't you know after seeing the gulf war?
the us navy marines who competed against them, were all defeated by them.
those were all soldiers.
only the officers fight here, so we'll surely be fine.
okay good, then let's compete with italy in the first round.
how about brazil?
their characteristics are really slow, they tried to make it compulsory for conscripts, but there were many who still thought of methods not to go.
but no matter what, they are still south america's best military power.
they also held a world officers sports competition last year.
to compete against them...
oh, how about netherlands.
that's right, although they are very tall their teamwork is also very good, but they can't even get into the top thirty with their military capabilities.
last year they were also eliminated in the first round.
okay, then let's set netherlands as the second.
how about turkey?
that is our good and friendly neighbor!
they helped us during the 625 korean war, how can we
oh, you guys are from the north so you're probably not clear about it.
if you're so firm on doing it like this, then how do we fight china?
during the war of liberation, it was a state of disunity, the help provided by china was so significant
okay, then, let's put aside and not talk about all those with friendly relationships and geographical relations.
separating those with relationships, which is the third country that's easy to handle?
dinner will begin in 30 minutes.
eun gyu tae
answer it.
hello?
aigoo, mr. eun gyu tae.
i heard that you called many times.
what dealings do you have for coming all the way here?
what dealings?
i was given an invitation card, that's why i came to korea.
i was also invited to the royal family dinner, that's why i'm here.
what's wrong?
if you still plan to threaten the princess
a disabled person and furthermore, one with a faint spirit, why would i want to touch her?
but, compared to the princess, shouldn't you worry about yourself?
i heard you have a son.
furthermore, he's a guard and the king's right-hand man.
i heard that he's really respectful towards his father.
if he knew that his father and i were so familiar with one another, what would happen then?
even if i can't stand on the stage,
i will always be at a place where you can see me.
what you have to say is also very short,
thank you everyone for coming.
just very briefly.
are there a lot of people?
is it fully seated?
will everyone be looking at me?
do you still remember watching the meteors with me?
at that time,
i actually didn't watch the meteors.
it was because of you, princess.
you were shining more brilliantly than the meteors.
and now, you're still very beautiful.
father, is it still not ready yet?
wait a moment, we are currently doing the final confirmation.
oh, oh, it's done, it's done.
i'll send it to you now via a text message.
as long as you follow this sequence, you'll be able to win.
thank you.
now, we will start selecting each team's opponent for the first round.
as you all know, the woc will be conducted as a tournament, in which 16 participating countries will gather around and pick their opponents for the first time.
last time, we gave the top 3 countries the chance to pick their opponents first, but this time, i will give the chance to the countries that have participating for first time.
special thanks to the us, the uk and china for showing us the friendly and peaceful spirit of the woc.
they really know how to act pretentiously.
they have the confidence to win no matter who they meet.
what did your father say?
follow in the order of italy, netherlands, egypt and iran and all will be well.
it's just like what we planned, -follow in the order of italy, netherlands, egypt and iran and all will be well.
it's just like what we planned, -follow in the order of italy, netherlands, egypt and iran and all will be well.- compete in the sequence of italy, netherlands, egypt and iran,
and there should be no problem.
since india is the first in the alphabetical order, we will let india to pick their opponents first.
how's india?
they are very strong.
they have a population of 1 billion.
in addition, they have good relationships with neighboring countries recently, and they are also currently expanding their military force.
really?
that's very good, we can use the opportunity to take revenge.
just pick china who is your neighboring country, china!
team india's opponent is...
team egypt.
it's all right.
egypt has the best military power in africa.
avoiding them is a good thing.
who are we left with now?
italy, the netherlands and iran?
next, the representative of italy please come and pick one.
choose us, us!
must definitely choose korea!
team italy's opponent is...
the uk.
italy should have chosen us instead!
we're italy in the east.
italy is in trouble this time,
britain is so strong.
next!
korea.
jeju forum on peace on the peninisula 
uh, who's going to...
netherlands.
iran.
netherlands.
iran, iran, iran.
netherlands.
iran, iran, iran.
you'll lose your luck if you take too long to pick.
whichever one you catch, just take that one.
korea's opponent is...
the us.
next episode preview
they made use of the magnetic force.
they placed a special magnetic stripe on top.
if this isn't dealt with properly, whether it's the royal family or south korea, it'll both be finished.
are you able to confirm her face?
immediately release him.
what exactly are you afraid of?
when the fate of this peninsula is precarious...
get out right now!
what's your name again?
aren't you the king?
this is the combat plan.
what do you mean by deliberately losing to them?
our friend the us?
or our homeland, korea?
don't you know?
the sort of hopeless situation that we are in?
only when we acquire the victory honorably, will i get engaged.
__file_terminal__
episode 18
can i make an international call?
where are you from?
you're not from here, right?
i'm from a small town.
wait for a moment.
take a seat.
thank you.
leave.
what?
run quickly.
what's your name?
i'm gim hang a.
you're the one who's engaged to the king of korea?
there isn't just 1 or 2
north korean defectors posing as gim hang a.
you can confirm it.
what are you staring at?
you entered our territory illegally.
listen carefully to what i have to say,
or else you'll lose your life in a split second.
translating device.
is gim hang a attended upon properly?
we will not hand her over to that side.
we will do it according to principles.
that is of course, but, you can still follow according to regulations and detain her for a month,
right?
do you know why i didn't kill gim hang a?
is it because i'm afraid of your oppression?
no... it's because gim hang a is a trump card, a trump card that is able to control the north and south in one move.
then how do you intend to use it?
i'll tell you very soon.
hey!
if you continue making noise, i'll do the same to you like the other north korean defectors, to be stripped naked and searched.
damn it, you're really troublesome.
i injured my arm, it really hurts.
is the doctor even coming?
just endure it for another week, during transferal,
i'll let you see the doctor, okay?
transferal?
to where?
how would i know where?
sleep!
damn it.
your majesty.
i'm sorry.
have you found out the legislative provisions related to the appeal to icc?
yes.
according to rome's icc law article 7, in any extensive or systematic attack directed against any civilian, in the circumstance where it is done knowingly and implementing all criminal behavior, it is equal to a crime against humanity.
the regicide committed against the former king and queen, fits well within this description.
have you changed your hobby to fishing?
hey, if you were going to change, you should have picked something you were good at.
what is this?
there hasn't even been a bite in over an hour.
a good start is half the race.
i have always felt that you were somewhat distant from me.
i know you had expectations of me, but i couldn't meet them.
i wanted to please you, but my abilities were lacking.
i used to be afraid, and you were too hard for me to approach.
so, i felt very inferior in front of you.
i think it's because of this that i got so angry with you.
i was trying to make up for my inferiority complex.
but i'm a little happy now.
really.
i think i can finally be independent from you.
father, no matter what happens to me, please don't ever blame yourself for it.
because, this is what i have chosen for myself.
father, you are you, and i am myself.
why, did something happen?
oh, a bite.
we waited over an hour to get that.
how could you lose it?
give it to me, i'll do it.
there's another rod, use that one.
give it to me, we don't need two of them.
it's fine.
i'm sure i can catch at least one fish.
all of the subjective and objective conditions have been met, right?
how about as they relate to state policies?
the woc partnership and the north-south marriage.
these things all show relevancy to state policy.
submitting our appeal is definitely possible.
very good.
this must all be kept strictly confidential.
please discuss the policy with all the key staff members.
y-your majesty.
i'm sorry, but there's something you need to know right away.
eun si gyeong is trying to go to china.
since i entered the royal guards, i have never once taken a day off.
i just wanted some time off.
why do you think his majesty was having you monitored?
it's because he was afraid you would try something crazy like this.
i understand.
if you won't give me any time off...
letter of resignation
hey.
eun si gyeong.
captain, why are you doing this?
you can't.
right now, you're not allowed to leave the country.
i'm forbidden to leave the country, your majesty?
what is it?
his majesty had instructed not to be disturbed by anyone.
say it right here.
you are prohibited to enter inside.
you have already decided to formally charge him, haven't you?
but what will it do?
even if you charge him,
china will still not allow our troops to enter their country and arrest him.
so, let me go to bong gu
there are a lot of people, who can be a spy besides you.
what if bong gu kills them all, one by one?
bong gu already knows that i'm your right-hand man.
so to deliver you a double blow, he will try to convince me at all costs.
so why will you not let me do this?
is it because i'm your friend?
then you may feel at ease, because i have never thought of you as my friend.
therefore, i'm begging you.
please allow me to go, your majesty!
lee jae ha!
you can stay in there forever looking for your friends to play with.
now that you don't have gim hang a beside you, you're afraid you will lose me too, right?
i have long ago let go of my guilt and all of that.
so i beg you to get yourself together!
lee jae ha?
you said we are friends.
you bastard, you've really gone too far!
i assure you...
i will come back.
that previous terrorist bombing...
german train bombing attempted terrorist attacks
will this be enough?
you have checked everything over, right?
yes.
the secret code...
is it convenient to take a phone call?
- you know it, right?
but before that, the issue with china should be settled first.
that's right.
i need a favor.
visit jae sin before you go.
you know of her current condition as well.
you also must know how she feels.
even if you are a big blockhead, you should have at least noticed this much
can i do as i wish?
haven't you always up until now?
can i or not?
not as a captain of the guards with the princess, but a person with another person.
what "a person with another person"?
should be a man with a woman.
following my heart.
this time, just this once...
can i go and see her?
it's me, bring princess lee jae sin to the rear garden.
then set up a roadblock 2km around the place and don't let anyone in.
yes, no one is allowed to go in.
except for captain eun si gyeong.
is that okay?
why are you taking my wheelchair away?
you've heard about my memory, right?
i was like a monster, right?
you probably suddenly thought that i'm very scary.
it was my father who told bong gu about anmyeondo.
but i decided not to blame myself.
father is father and i am me.
princess, you're also the same.
it's their fault and not yours.
by just taking that memory out, you're very strong.
it's absolutely not your fault.
princess, i'm going on a vacation soon.
why?
where are you going?
i'll give you some homework.
when you finish them, i'll be back.
just like a textbook again.
say "it wasn't my fault" 100 times a day.
eun si gyeong, you have to do this 100 times as well.
okay.
and then you have to smile 3 times a day, even if it's forced.
then you have to attend psychotherapy diligently and don't forget rehab.
you also have to practice being in front of people.
i will.
and start singing again.
what else is there?
i'm sorry.
what for?
seriously, idiot.
what is this?
so it turns out that's what si gyeong did.
i tried to stop him, but he insisted on going.
no...
i sent him.
now that i think about it, i was only pretending to stop him.
because i really needed his help.
but if i felt grateful in letting him go, i would feel that i'm a really bad person.
you're thinking too much, your majesty.
if you say that, then what will i become?
come back to the palace.
there's too many things to do before i report him.
just like you did for hyeong, come and stay by my side.
the salary will drop a little, the royal family's finances aren't too good at the moment.
before that, i must seek forgiveness from someone.
i just told the location like this and then concealed the incident.
telling the queen dowager the truth is the hardest thing to do.
on the standpoint of having a child myself,
i have no idea how i managed to conceal the incident at that time.
how was it?
facial expression...
didn't you see jae gang one last time?
was he happy?
yes, because he had not been on a vacation for so long.
when he left?
he had a smile on his face.
that's enough.
the north sent this over today.
this was discovered at the theme park, where your majesty was being threatened.
although we searched the surroundings, we couldn't recover it to it's former state.
i understand, you can go out.
are you happy?
are you happy watching me find evidence up there?
these two places are the most heavily guarded.
i feel that this direction is a bit better.
yes, your majesty.
i've found it, the evidence.
i've heard.
i'm also ready.
okay, you have to be careful.
your majesty, the reporters are all waiting.
okay.
lee jae ha?
yes, he's about to make an announcement.
my sources tell me it's about us.
but i think he's just bluffing.
no, he's not the kind that does things without thinking.
contact the site.
today i want to tell all the citizens tragic news.
the death of the former king, lee jae gang,
has been confirmed that he was murdered.
and it was a multinational enterprise, that murdered our former king.
starting now you'll be watching the video with the evidence.
you were successful in provoking me.
are you feeling great?
but, what to do?
i deliberately told you.
why?
because i'm extremely powerful.
please start after the "beep".
are you happy?
the setting of the "start" keyword has finished.
are you happy?"
are you happy?
you were successful in provoking me.
are you feeling great?
woc and north and south related by marriage...
of course i'm not very happy.
but...
that wasn't the reason why i killed your hyeong.
your hyeong, thought that he could actually prohibit my entry into the country...
you know, he died not knowing anything at all.
just like a fool.
he drank the wine...
confused alcohol with fatigue.
who is that person?
is that club m's john mayer?
yes, it's club m's john mayer.
a king is more than just a king.
he represents the 50 million citizens in our country.
club m's john mayer has murdered 50 million of our citizens.
he has trampled and has made fun of us.
so, according to article 7 of the rome statute,
i'll report him to the icc for suspected of crimes against humanity.
we'll fight to the end and catch him.
in accordance with the principles of justice he will be brought to justice.
it looks like we have to hide until this blows over.
contact the shelter.
tell them to move gim hang a early tomorrow morning.
yes, sir.
john mayer has become dangerously uncontrollable and an extreme risk to club m's global operations.
we're going down to tangshan and buy a house a5, tonight.
and as we do every morning, we'll go for a mid morning walk the following morning.
and what i want you to do is to secretly organize for a hit squad to take him out.
and then finally we'll be able to organize the next line of succession for club m's throne, who will be...
who?
you?
you know the secret signal, right?
those people that were plotting with him, contact them, then kill them all.
the people that are handling this need to be watched.
when it's finished get them to come here.
yes, we'll get him to go there.
looks like you figured out what his father did.
is this some way of expressing loyalty?
is he sacrificing himself for his father's mistake?
i'm sorry.
rotten cookies...
i don't eat them.
kill me.
i asked you to kill me immediately.
don't kill him.
treat him well, just monitor him will do.
don't let him escape.
he got in successfully.
i'm gonna take real good care of you.
gim bong gu, he is more cunning than what we expected.
if you surrender immediately, he will get suspicious.
i'm afraid you really have to persist till the end.
it's fine already, don't pretend anymore.
her condition is very good, she can be transferred.
what are you doing?
don't move!
retreat.
retreat!
hand phone.
quickly!
because there's sufficient evidence,
icc directly began the investigation without any preparations.
the arrest warrant was officially issued yesterday.
for china, i will communicate with them through russia.
if we do so through a third country
yes?
comrade lee jae ha!
this is china's shelter!
ha-hang a...
it's china!
china's shelter!
this fellow made me
don't move!
hang a...
gim hang a!
hang a!
is it miss gim hang a?
please help me to contact china's embassy and the north.
and then help us to cancel all schedules.
i will go to china immediately.
quickly move her out, if our position is being tracked by him...
is that so?
director wang.
what's the matter?
there's news from the republic of korea and the north.
what did you say?
they have now requested to prohibit entry and exit of the personnel in the shelter on the border.
since receiving your order, we have prevented the entry and exit of anyone.
senior officer, what should we do now?
depends on the situation.
we must definitely send her away.
thank you for coming from afar.
3 hours ago i received a phone call from my fiancée that she's here.
the signal was also emitted from here.
we would like to search.
is this a misunderstanding?
go and search.
miss gim hang a!
wait a moment!
miss hang a.
miss gim hang a!
comrade gim hang a!
miss gim hang a!
comrade gim hang a...
take a look on the second floor.
yes.
comrade gim hang a!
miss gim hang a!
don't move!
you'll die if you move again!
your royal majesty, it may take some time, would you like to go in first?
no, i'll wait here.
where exactly did you lock up my fiancée?
how exactly did you treat her?
i must see it with my own eyes.
take her out!
grab hold of her.
comrade lee jae ha!
i'm here!
comrade lee jae ha!
i'm over here!
shut up!
grab hold of her!
over there.
no, you can't!
you can't!
open the door!
shut up!
don't talk!
take her out.
search everywhere!
miss gim hang a!
comrade gim hang a!
miss gim hang a!
hang a...
gim hang a!
hang a!
shut up!
faster!
go!
pull her out.
what are you looking at?
hang a...
let's go quickly, let's go quickly.
quickly!
gim hang a!
no!
hang a!
comrade lee jae ha, i'm all right.
hang a...
okay.
i guess we can do that.
lee jae ha has found gim hang a.
china has been cornered.
we should use...
eun si gyeong.
now that's the best option.
is the sound of the water drops getting louder?
this proves that your body is breaking down.
30 minutes more and you'll lose your mind, and go insane, totally insane.
release him.
immediately!
my staff officer said that...
i should make you one of us.
then get you to kill lee jae ha.
and also, you have to do it personally.
based on your character, you shouldn't be able to do it to that extent, right?
i also... don't want to ask you to do it to that extent...
but, you have to promise me one thing.
become one of my men.
i also wish to have a serious and useful person by my side.
but you don't have any.
not even one.
if not, you'll become extremely lonely.
where exactly did it go wrong?
isn't this a world where money reigns supreme?
just believing what i see,
i also survived successfully.
i'm just only living and thinking like that, but why... why do i still have to be troubled by this kind of useless thing for the whole day?
you should have thought about it first, and not place your survival in the first place of importance.
you can just be my man.
just follow according to their original plan.
what do you mean by their plan?
i'm the only person.
it's written all over your face...
you're not suitable to be a double spy.
lee jae ha sent you here...
to lure us into the trap, right?
if you calculate it carefully, isn't he worse than me?
how can he let his own friend...
didn't he even pretend to stop you?
to break away from his own responsibilities.
the truth is, he's more ruthless.
it's just that in front of all of you, he always acts good and honest.
if he was born in the past,
king yeon san?
can't even match up to him.
you're also only of that standard.
you thought that what you can see is considered to be everything.
you're right.
so, why don't you...
come and change me.
be by my side like a friend, and give me some advice.
how about being my dongsaeng?
if you hate those stinky fellows by my side,
i'll send them all away.
so, you can... come to my side and properly...
aren't you the culprit?
stinky culprit.
what happened?
if it doesn't work out, should we just... just kill him?
continue taking good care of him, with the best treatment.
does it not hurt here?
father...
don't get up, you're still receiving an intravenous drip.
his majesty...
help me to call his majesty.
why are you so anxious?
bong gu...
gim bong gu is an extremely malicious fellow.
we have to find him as soon as possible.
hang a...
comrade lee jae ha!
gim bong gu...
do you have any method to capture him?
if we just leave it like this without caring, we will all be framed.
we have to catch that fellow quickly.
please wait for a moment.
there's a method, right?
it was drawn up, right?
don't think about anything.
hang a, just rest well.
no.
how can there be time to rest?
you have no idea how scary that fellow is...
i'm sorry, hang a...
for not being able to protect you...
now is not the time to be idle
i know.
seeing you this way...
you've been so afraid and it's been hard on you for this period of time...
i understand it all.
i'm sorry, hang a.
i said i wanted to give you happiness, but yet i'm so weak and powerless.
i'm really sorry.
it's all right.
i'm director wang tao from the central office board,
i'm really sorry for this incident.
is that all?
can this kind of matter be settled by you just saying that?
if you're really sorry, then use actions to show it.
club m's john mayer is in your country,
i believe you already know that.
please assist us in arresting him.
that...
if you feel it's difficult for you to appear in person, then at least agree to it and let our army in.
two months from now, it is planned that both our countries will undergo joint military exercises, that you should know, right?
with this kind of attitude, do you think we will still participate?
don't even talk about joint military exercises, we will surely join hands with russia directly.
just because of you, what is this?
leave our country immediately!
lee jae ha is not the only person who can create a whirlwind.
when i create one, you also won't be able to differentiate water and fire.
do you think all the things you obtained from us are for free?
it's coming to election period soon, what are you going to do if this were to leak out?
threatening also needs to have a certain degree.
we're not from there,
we are a country.
if we were to fight, who do you think would win?
now is the time where all of you have to retreat.
leave before 3pm by tomorrow.
hey you... now the arrest warrant issued by the icc...
where's eun si gyeong?
okay, have you thought about it?
hyeong.
but now, the situation isn't too good.
lee jae ha... lure him out.
just follow according to your plan!
just pretend that you're following us, and give them a fake address.
must do it, you...
i really don't want to destroy you.
weren't you already tortured?
that's only for kids, if i were to personally give an order, it is very vicious.
it's so vicious that it can be lethal.
so, let's do things together.
12pm.
make a decision by tomorrow afternoon.
otherwise...
so, why do you have to force me into such a position?
were you talking about comrade eun si gyeong?
he purposely let bong gu capture him.
he's also scouting our opponent's movement and was supposed to send news to us secretly...
but there has been none.
isn't that equivalent to entering a lion's den?
what if there is any accident?
i... will blame myself forever.
it has already been confirmed that our army will come tomorrow morning.
we should wait and see.
we have to believe him...
eun si gyeong.
you can take it because you're a soldier.
but what about your father and the princess?
i have permission now...
it's only gonna get worse, and worse...
i won't even kill them.
this is only gonna go on...
and on.. and on...
your father and the princess will be naked and begging.
but we won't stop.
yes?
your majesty.
it's si gyeong.
eun si gyeong, are you all right?
yes, it's nothing serious.
is there a possibility for a turn in the situation?
i've already entered the interior.
i've started gaining gim bong gu's trust.
you've done well.
it's very tough on you, right?
what about bong gu?
have you found out his hiding place?
yes.
latitude 38-57-25-89.
longitude 118-33-04-54.
these are the geographic coordinates.
okay.
we have already contacted china for assistance, so we will now send guards and our army over.
your majesty, are you not coming?
now, i've already seen hang a... but because she's hurt, we may have to make a trip back to korea.
come over and personally witness...
bong gu being captured.
isn't this the reason why we rushed back and forth?
if you're in the capital, this location is also very near, it won't even take 3 hours.
i will go out and fetch you.
okay, where do i go?
about 5 kilometers north-west of the location i told you, there's a raw materials electrical plant.
let's meet there at 3pm.
okay.
will you really be all right?
it's okay.
you go back first.
i also want to go, with you...
no.
your leg is already like this, where can you go?
and who is it i'm going to see?
it's eun si gyeong.
i'll be back soon.
let's meet in the republic of korea.
why are you so much thinner?
your majesty, please follow me.
what about the guards?
let them go to the place i told you about.
because the personnel and equipment there should not be underestimated.
with one more person, there will be at least more attacking power.
he's leaving now.
your car is pretty good.
how's your body?
did you get hurt?
i... want to go back.
why is that?
i'm still unable to stop worrying about his majesty.
you said gim bong gu... is hiding in this kind of place?
yes.
welcome, your majesty.
yep.
so, we're in full agreeance then.
good, good.
now,
__file_terminal__
happy birthday to you!
we love you our section chief.
happy birthday to you!
happy birthday, section chief!
episode 19- happy birthday!
what is it?
do i look that scary?
no, princess.
i'm also here to celebrate your birthday with you.
happy birthday, section chief.
thank you, princess.
i prepared this specially for you.
thank you.
open it, section chief.
there's no need.
open it.
okay.
try carrying it.
try carrying it, section chief.
isn't this too expensive?
it really suits you.
how is it?
does it suit me?
you also have to practice being in front of people.
and start singing again.
sit down.
if you're having a hard time, then you can leave.
no, i'll stay.
drop the lawsuit, break up with gim hang a and step down from the throne.
if not
is he in charge of killing me?
well, that's without a doubt.
korea will fall into a crisis.
your citizens might all die.
whether it's you or republic of korea, make a choice.
i'll give you 10 minutes to decide.
i... want to go back.
why is that?
i'm still unable to stop worrying about his majesty.
he's the south's king, nothing will happen to him.
in fact...
i've already discussed it with his majesty.
i'm sorry, father.
it concerns the issue of safety, we didn't manage to tell you on time.
we only told the section chief of the bodyguards.
how are you feeling right now?
your person has come over to my side.
don't hate him too much.
i've also used a lot of effort to get him to come to my side.
be honest, have you tried striving for him?
didn't you get it for free because of your royal status?
i use money to buy people, you use the title of king to rope people in.
what's the difference between us?
you... is this really how it is?
what is there to like about a king in name only?
but, i was once shaken.
when you said that you would step down, and when you stopped me from coming here.
but that's all there is.
you always avoid your responsibilities and never admit defeat.
even if the current situation is a 99% improbable reality, you'll always think of every possible way, to try and find the answer in that 1% possibility.
i'm not staying by your side because you're a king, but because you have never given up in a hopeless situation.
freeze!
will this be enough?
you have checked everything over, right?
yes.
the secret code...
is it convenient to take a phone call?
- you know it, right?
is it convenient to take a phone call?
we got them to tell us the code.
he'll say the real location next.
i've got it.
start cracking the aes.
(aes
advance encryption standard)
what were you getting me to choose?
republic of korea or my life?
my choice... is you.
drop your guns!
you too.
hold your hands up.
my name is peter macnicol, icc investigation.
john mayer, you have the right to remain silent.
if you do say anything, what you say can be used against you in a court of law.
you have the right to consult to the lawyer, and have that lawyer present during any questioning.
if you choose to talk to the police officer, you have the right to stop the interview at any time.
si gyeong...
eun si gyeong!
why did you make me like this?
eun si gyeong...
eun si gyeong!
your majesty.
don't... don't talk.
quickly call an ambulance!
what to do... what to do...
because of me...
don't... say that...
i made this choice.
didn't we catch bong gu?
si gyeong.
in the future, definitely...
don't give up.
because you're...
eun si gyeong!
the king.
si gyeong...
eun si gyeong.
eun si gyeong!
don't die!
don't die...
si gyeong!
eun si gyeong!
this is an order... don't die!
eun si gyeong!
don't die, eun si gyeong!
eun si gyeong!
si gyeong!
eun si gyeong!
don't die!
eun si gyeong!
don't die...
eun si gyeong!
eonni, what did you... just say?
comrade eun si gyeong has died while on a mission.
he said he was going on a vacation.
it's true.
eun si gyeong, he won't lie.
eun si gyeong
he promised that he'll come back...
he even gave me some homework...
he said he'll come back, after i've finished my homework.
i even practiced... practiced singing...
he promised he'll come back...
eonni...
no...
royal family bodyguard squad 2 captain eun si gyeong.
our present thoughts are probably the same.
i was the one who caused his death.
he died because of me.
but, because i'm king,
i can't be just thinking of these.
ajussi, you're probably the same.
although i'm a bit different from him, what do you think of me?
i'll treat you like my father, and take care of you.
may the late captain eun si gyeong rest in peace
attention!
salute!
at ease!
your majesty.
captain, he...
because of this mission, the records still state that he's on a mission abroad.
please let him return to the troop.
at least let his soul be able to return home.
i order, captain eun si gyeong, to immediately return to the troop.
i am martin klimer, prosecutor at the icc.
please provide me with short and clear answers to my questions.
when the proof was filmed, was there any trap or conciliation from the current king?
did you attempt to kill korean king the 3rd lee jae gang and queen bak hyeon ju?
after this matter,
i've only learned one thing.
that is, a person like me, simply shouldn't have the extra emotions.
it doesn't even have a bit of benefit.
we are the legal council for club m.
we have a bail request for john mayer.
he absolutely can't have bail.
this is unbelievable.
it wasn't easy to catch him.
i'll go and consult with the royal family's group of legal experts.
you might have to stay around a little longer.
south korea strongly claims you could flee.
the people that we placed in the united states, china and the other countries, what are they all doing?
they're readying a petition with influential politicians.
petition?
that's all?
tell those people that accepted our political donations, that i'm going to publicly announce them.
no.
i'm going to say everything.
then we'll get hurt too.
in order to wake up, cutting off a couple of fingers is a must.
they didn't look at who was the one that got caught.
i'll get the action underway, regardless of the consequences.
also, between the south and north, continue to pressure them.
if they can suppress it this time, then we're finished.
really?
serious?
yes.
forex service will also be open for foreign diplomats on the weekend.
the mobile banking for money exchange will go directly to
i'm sorry.
yes, mother.
after i finished helping to give out breakfast in the morning,
i'm currently a volunteer at a bank.
i'm doing very well now, so don't worry.
don't think of anything, when you're all better you can come back.
okay, mother.
who were you talking on the phone with just then?
was it a man?
it'll be good if i have a man that i can talk to on the phone.
you're tired, right?
it's quite interesting.
it's all things that mother has done in the past.
i heard that there were a lot suggestions for our wedding date to be on 15th of august.
the royal family committee is also recommending that day.
hello?
why aren't you saying anything?
you don't want to get married?
what are you trying to say now?
it's quite good to not get married.
what are you saying?
we got here with a lot difficulties.
later when it's time to go to the boulevard to film the video of unity, come over an hour earlier.
yes.
before you begin filming,
i'll treat you to a delicious cake.
wear jeans and put on a cap, and let's go for a walk.
holding hands.
can we?
we have to prepare for the wedding and participate in promotional activities.
we're so busy, how can we...
what's wrong with making use of the time in between to date?
forget it if you don't want to.
i might as well shoot the publicity video with someone else.
there are a lot of beautiful woman there.
should i film with them?
can we really be like ordinary people, going to eat cake and drinking coffee?
can we do that?
the sunshine is very good today.
let's... just find a table at a cafeteria and have a drink.
to do this...
wait for me to finish my next activity, then i'll come over immediately.
wait for me.
i understand, i'll see you later.
this one is nice.
the things that need to be done has already been decided, why did the united states suddenly change their minds?
not only this.
they also announced that they won't adjust the exchange rates.
so an increase on the public tax is unavoidable.
also, they suddenly notified us that they cancelled the expert visa.
it seems like they have already started carrying out an economic sanction on us.
what was the reason?
and also, the director of the u.s national security council has requested to have a chat with you.
it seems to be in regards to this matter.
i'll get directly to the point.
we are getting ready for a petition, so that john mayer can get bailed.
232, only for politicians.
the u.s, china and many other countries are getting involved.
putting john mayer under arrest is a tragedy of international contradictions.
it is also a tragedy of the republic of korea's royal family.
he's indispensable.
he's a murderer.
the court will make a judgement.
so i recommend that you help us get john mayer on bail.
otherwise, korea will experience much more sanctions.
all this economic pressure that you are currently exerting, is for this?
did you get it already?
so it's going to be easy now.
hello?
the request to bail john mayer, is it you, calton, your own opinion?
or is it an official standpoint from the united states government?
well, it's part of u.s politician's opinion.
but as you know, i am the director of the u.s national security council.
is that so?
but i'm south korea's king.
since it isn't an official standpoint from the united states government and not your own opinion, but instead we have to understand by looking at the situation ourselves.
because i don't understand these things, in the future, if the official positions in the united states government have a standing, call me again to let me know.
get the minister of economy and the minister of foreign affairs to come here.
to give a personal call to your majesty is a very unusual matter.
the current situation is quite bad.
if this continues for 6 months, the recovery period of the economy in our country, will be fatally affected.
using the diplomatic practice to say that the united states requests a bail on john mayer, is a disrespectful move, but it's not like he isn't getting a trial.
he absolutely can't have bail, your majesty.
a bail on john mayer will have a big influence on the trial.
he'll definitely escape to the third country during his bail.
john mayer must definitely receive his punishment.
the key problem is the degree of the economic sanction.
just a moment.
yes.
i can't attend them.
cancel all of my schedule for today.
cancel them all.
okay.
father.
china has sealed the oil pipeline again?
the party is currently causing a commotion.
the corn assistance scheme has also been suspended.
if it's like that, the supply for the people will be reduced too.
that gim bong gu, we can't let him off easily.
you also know what he did to me, right?
father, we, north korea should also provide some power.
they are giving us a lot of pressure.
then if gim bong gu is released, will china give us a present?
interrupting the verdict, cancelling the lawsuit by asserting pressure to the south.
they will be extremely greedy.
isn't this the south's matter?
can't you just not care about the national affairs and just support your own country?
father!
right now, protecting his majesty is my most important job.
father, didn't you say this before?
to let me become a south korean.
what exactly should i do that'll be good?
i'm sorry that i broke my promise.
i'm about to go crazy because of gim bong gu.
we, north korea will also give our bit of strength too.
the north representative group has decided to go to the icc.
and...
i'll be going too.
what?
your majesty, doesn't gim bong gu have a crime of disturbing the south-north peace?
at this type of time, to use a person like me as a representative will be very useful.
talking about representative model...
your majesty and i are the most typical type.
you can't.
kidnapping, imprisonment... what other troubles do you still want to create?
i want to help you, your majesty.
therefore
i just want you to stay put and not do anything, until gim bong gu is punished.
at the very least during gim bong gu's adjudication.
can't you just stay by my side?
right now, the most important matter is to deal with gim bong gu as earliest as possible.
icc is a struggle of political power.
politically, it seems that it's just your majesty and the south that's fighting alone.
so as a representative of the north, i want you give you some strength.
i said it's okay, you can just stay put.
i can't bear you being kidnapped again.
then when exactly do i have to hide until?
didn't i just say it?
until gim bong gu is in prison
what if he doesn't go to prison?
are you going to be afraid of gim bong gu for a lifetime and hide in the palace?
you can just stay in the palace.
what is this?
in order to catch gim bong gu...
you even brought calamity to me...
if it's okay to ask...
do you still remember the place you went to for a community interview?
are you able to go there for an interview?
now... at this time of the day?
yes.
there seems to be an elderly who lives alone that isn't feeling well.
that elderly is determined to see you.
actually...
his majesty told me not to leave the palace...
it should be okay, right?
yes, he has allowed it.
he said you can go.
where is this elderly?
the elderly that lives alone is lee jae ha?
yes.
is this the romantic place that you were talking about?
right now is 11 in the evening.
the place that i mentioned has too many people.
they'll recognize us in 2 seconds.
what are you going to do if gim bong gu appears?
i'm scared.
it's okay here, because i have it guarded.
forget it.
it's so empty here, and it also lacks atmosphere.
i'm here, aren't i?
there isn't a warm sunshine either.
but there's moonlight.
i'm sorry.
i can't hold your hand like what normal people do.
i also can't have tea breaks with you.
i also can't take leisure walks with you...
i'm really sorry.
i'm sorry for shouting at you everyday.
i'm sorry for getting angry at you.
i said i wanted to give you happiness, but i made you undergo so much suffering.
i'm really sorry.
so i don't want to lose you again.
if i really don't have you, i won't be able to do anything.
just believe in me.
it's too intense!
won't we die?
comrade lee jae ha!
can you let me ride this one more time?
it's the best!
i feel really great!
comrade lee jae ha!
are you all right?
if your left shoelace is loose, it means that someone is thinking about you.
who is thinking about you so much now?
why don't we go together?
don't just see me as a woman.
please see me as one who is able to proceed hand in hand with your majesty.
why is a two-wheeled car also more reliable than a single-wheeled car?
are you determined to go?
comrade lee jae ha...
i already said that i'm not your comrade.
okay then, i'm gim bong gu.
what will you do about me?
the place i'm going to is the icc, isn't gim bong gu at the detention center
what if he were to escape?
i'm gim bong gu.
what will you do if you see me?
it's a late introduction.
i'm gim hang a, the fiancée of south korea's king.
the south calls me the woman from the north.
you son-of-a-bitch, you met the right person today.
you... actually caused my beloved to be deeply tormented?
today... is the date of your death.
i'll do well.
as long as you say what you want to do...
i'll support you.
please give me three days.
be back soon.
you know that i'm always by your side, right?
i will return safely.
hello, i'm gim hang a, the representative of the north for the icc's interview.
nice to meet you.
my name is martin klimer,
i'm the chief prosecutor at the icc.
actually, i'm in charge of john mayer's case.
john mayer has more than 40 companies.
he also has a lot of properties abroad.
furthermore, club m's members are guilty of illegal possession of passports in many cases.
excuse me, could you please make it short?
i'm only saying what needs to be said.
and i think that john mayer is very likely to destroy evidence.
during the time of the late king's assassination, he also manufactured the ep-070 hand phone
i'm sorry.
but john mayer's bail has been approved 20 minutes ago.
isn't the deciding date of his bail consent 2 weeks later?
this is a discretion of the chief of justice.
what's the reason?
because his health was deteriorating.
if he is bailed out today, there is still 3 days left to extend his prosecution, right?
will views about the prosecution still change?
it is useless.
the justice department made this decision.
petition from many influential leaders have been approved.
we can also submit a petition from thousands of people
i'm sorry, but there's too much gap between their respective influence weight.
your opponent is united states of america.
and if you're finished, we're gonna leave now.
flying here took me a full 14 hours!
towards a country's representative, how can you not even have time for 5 minutes
i deal with many countries as chief prosecutor, is there any reason for me to talk to the north korean dedication for more than 2 minutes?
what is our country regarded as?
how can it be so powerless?
it seems like the international status of the north has been raised.
indeed, after all you're married to the king.
your husband has helped you a lot...
i heard that you used health deterioration as a reason to obtain a bail opportunity, but you don't look that ill.
that is influential people from the whole world... who understands the pain my heart has.
indeed, with the imminent disaster of going to prison, you must be overwhelmed with anxiety.
are the marriage preparations getting on smoothly?
as long as you don't be a hindrance.
i will.
i'll create a big fight.
explosion attack?
yes.
so you mean that
washington has already decided to attack the north?
no...
we are talking about it just as a physical action measure.
but the important thing is that these things are being mentioned over and over again.
are you happy?
what do you mean?
shouldn't you not be saying random nonsense if you're not in a public position?
starting from now, regarding my questions, please answer accurately.
regarding washington attacking the north...
has it already been decided?
it's a us military strategy.
we never tell foreigners.
and we won't tell korea.
we have no obligation to do so.
but if we do, we do.
and if we don't...
oh no we don't.
that is also true...
don't worry about this too much.
no decisions have been made yet.
but since it's directly related to national security,
i'll come again.
do it well.
right, if you're attacking the north...
the united states better not take a step into the republic of south korea.
that's okay right?
lee jae ha will definitely be difficult to deal with.
he's only a king.
the commanding authority of the country's army is also nothing.
that won't work.
so, it will be good if you also just stay put...
obediently let us hit you a few times, won't it be good?
what to do?
the expression in your eyes...
shows uncertainty and instability.
when i was undergoing assassination training, what was emphasized on the most was this.
expression management.
but you completely can't manage it.
were you frightened till like this?
it's interesting, miss north.
i'll send lee jae ha a mail today,
marriage documents.
you and lee jae ha should take a good look at it.
your north... what must they do in order to survive on this earth?
that's my trade secret.
oh, that's right.
it should also be quite difficult for the republic of south korea to survive.
if war were to breaks out between neighboring countries.
expression management!
you obviously just avoided...
call off the lawsuit against them, and the problems of national security must all be handled following their method.
the special united states
this is absolutely not possible.
this is equivalent to selling our country.
but then, what are we going to do if a war breaks out?
although the instructions gives a false strong imposing manner, but it can't possibly really lead to a war.
to us, the danger of war has always existed since the beginning.
but this became more serious because of the marriage.
miss gim hang a, you didn't do anything wrong.
they are just deliberately finding fault.
now they are using subtle psychological warfare on us.
we must absolutely not let them have control over us.
but that fellow gim bong gu... is a person who's able to do what he says.
even if the possibility of war is only 1%, we must also be able to stop it.
your majesty.
your majesty now... you must make a choice between two options.
first option, fulfill all conditions requested by gim bong gu, everything must be accomplished.
because of the danger of war which has always existed, unconditionally raise the white flag and present our country to them, surrendering totally.
second option, try out all methods except surrendering.
and we must try to prevent a war outbreak as much as possible by doing our best.
if your majesty was a citizen, what kind of king would you want to choose?
let's start from diplomacy.
today, king lee jae ha and his fiancée miss gim hang a
began their journey to inquire after 20 countries.
inquiring after 20 countries at once
is a unprecedented move in the history of the royal family.
now, more than 70 people including the senior official of the foreign affairs ministry
have also participated in this trip.
i'm really sorry.
if captain eun was to meet with any mishaps, he had told me that i must pass this to the princess.
but i'm still too late...
this... what is it?
it was given to the royal family bank for safekeeping, it's the guard's personal treasury.
what's the code?
8603... 8603.
i'm sorry...
it's my birthday.
the captain is really...
who still uses such an antique now?
this is the only place in the palace where you can see this.
the captain's room.
after becoming the squadron leader, i took over the captain's room.
this is really outdated and i had intended to throw it away, fortunately i didn't.
is it recording now?
that, i...
originally intended to write a letter.
but i'm really bad at writing so i did it like this...
is it recording?
just now that...
that kiss... i'm very sorry.
i...
am a coward, princess.
because i'm really boring and uninteresting,
if i was to make a slight mistake, you'll probably feel bored,
so, i always just only keep watch of you.
but it's still not working...
from the first time i met you,
i already liked you.
you're very unrestrained and graceful.
these are traits i don't have...
i've thought about it tens of thousands of times, about how good it will be if i'm the person princess likes.
i... to princess...
i'm not very fitting, right?
so that's why i mustered up my courage because i want to become a good fit with princess.
if... you were to see this...
no, i...
it's nothing.
you won't see it.
i'm also not going to die.
i will come back with a dignified appearance.
i will also bring along the humor manual.
there will no longer be a boring person in the future.
immobility.
the power of immobility.
i'll be as confident and cool as princess when i come back, and i will definitely...
tell you personally.
that i love you.
loyalty.
today, king lee jae ha had dinner with the prime minister of germany.
what's more special is that the north's ministry of economy had also went along on this berlin trip,
and will interview 5 major cities in europe, therefore it has gained more attention.
there's still no reply regarding the gift i sent out, right?
nah...
what about the united states?
the congressmen they are trying hard.
but then they seem to be having some difficulty in making an issue out of the north korean attacks without causing... political opposition.
besides, the north and the south, they are in a peaceful mood right now.
no more excuses.
is it?
then create it, excuses.
bomb terrorist attacks in united states michigan
the bomb terrorist attacks in michigan have resulted in 40 casualties.
the criminals of the suicide bombings are of north korean nationality,
the alleged terrorists had shouted "just kill and punish the american bullies." before the suicide bombings.
there were 40 casualties in the state of michigan due to a terror attack.
the terrorists were found to be of north korean nationality.
right before the attack,
connect to the white house.
they reportedly shouted "just kill and punish the american bullies."
sir, north korea made a terror attack on us.
how long are we going to tolerate this?
your majesty.
the north korean terror attack is so grave and unfortunate,
we are seriously considering a severe physical reaction.
we are prepared to resolve the situation by any means necessary.
let's return directly to korea.
yes.
are you sure?
those fellows who did the suicide bombings are not of north korean nationality, right?
i got it.
i say... even so, there's also a need to re-investigate properly, there must be no mistakes.
but even if it's the united states, there's also no reason to suddenly do this!
about china... have you confirmed?
i think that this matter isn't so simple.
they did not hesitate to fake nationality to frame us, there must definitely be a reason.
this should not be just to scare us.
this american empire, in the end still...
why did we sign a peace agreement with the south?
they felt that something is wrong seeing us so close to them, so now the americans have come forward, isn't it?
it is because of such a time that we signed it.
request assistance from the south.
no matter how much effort we put into gathering information, we also can't completely confirm whether or not the united states will attack us.
if we keep saying that it wasn't done by us, others will just only treat it as a political response.
the more excuses we make, the more the matter will become harder to control.
so...
now we should ask the south to come forth and help us mediate?
will the south consider us as a priority more than the united states?
then, comrade chairman... do you still want to fight with the united states?
it is not, right?
we will die if we do so.
contact the south secretly, and request for them to mediate for the united states and us.
yes?
hello, mr. president.
this is mike taylor, r.o.k u.s combined forces command.
yes, i heard.
the status for war preparation has rose to the third stage.- the status for war preparation in the republic of south korea has rose to the third stage
because there is a possibility of an all-out war.
our country's war preparation status has risen to the third stage...
this is the third time after the 1976 panmunjom ax murderer incident and the 1983 rangoon bombing terrorist incident.
have you contacted the south?
already contacted.
they said that they are also trying hard to communicate with the administration department of the united states.
they said that they are doing that political discussion only because of the terrorist attack.
but, why... during the third stage, the military operations power of our army will be handed over to the combined korean-american headquarters.
the usfk will begin increasing american garrison on the surroundings of the korean peninsula.
(usfk
united states forces korea)
our army will pay strict attention to the movements in the north and prepare for the possibility of an attack.
did you see that?
after the participation of the woc and north-south marriage, this is the south's answer, who we have trusted for 3 years.
prepare for an announcement.
comrade chairman...
gim nam il!
if you want to talk about the issue of trust with the south then get out immediately!
at the same time that the u.s is attacking pyeongyang, our army and our citizens,
will immediately bombard seoul and turn that place into a sea of fire.
our trust for the south has already fallen.
why are they suddenly like this?
when did we betray them?
who is his majesty's personal bodyguard for today?
it's yeom dong ha.
get yeom dong ha to contact me on the security number.
yes.
you just saw the news, right?
now is a very sensitive period, don't say so much and follow the orders!
although it's like that, but how can...
yes, i understand.
can we go down now?
only your majesty will be going down.
why?
gim hang a's father is currently waiting for her.
father?
yes.
he said that he wants to see his daughter.
where is he?
we'll go meet him together.
he wants to see his daughter alone.
why...
i'll send you both back to the palace in a moment, so your majesty can go back first.
you should go first, i'll catch up with you immediately.
father.
the rain is quite heavy.
panmunjeom- -seoul
father.
you said you were going to treat me to dinner, why are we here?
father.
what's going on?
please go in first, your majesty.
i'm asking you, what's going on?
it has already been announced that we're entering the third stage for war preparations.
what?
at 9am this morning, the military operations power has already been handed over to the combined korean-american headquarters.
father, what exactly is this?
say something.
the north... has announced that they are going to attack seoul.
it's war.
the united states has declared that they'll attack pyeongyang, then...
pyeongyang will immediately attack seoul.
what about hang a?
let's go.
now, to be able to leave like this is because i pleaded with the south's ministry of unification.
no, i can't return to the north like this!
where's hang a!
comrade lee jae ha!
father!
what?
__file_terminal__
subtitles brought to you by the i see dead people team @ viki
episode 1
tae yang!
miss tae.
yes?
this afternoon, room 404 left again.
go clean up.
room 404?
i don't understand why that room can't go for long without being vacated.
is the chest of drawers unlucky?
tae yang, take the dresser from that room out, too.
yes.
pretend you didn't see.
mom!
go away!
i told you to go!
excuse me.
a grandmother told me to give you this money.
our mother?
this money...
it's ten million won!
it really is!
omo!
she said to use it to help fund the funeral and use the rest to pay off your debt.
mother.
there was also something else she wanted me to tell you.
please, tell me.
you rotten bastard!
if you ever touch gambling again, i'll come and cut your hand off, you bastard!
don't gamble anymore!
is what she said.
it really is mom's account book.
my word, ten million won.
how did she have this money?
give it to me.
that's not all yours, half of it is mine.
how is it yours?
mother told her to deliver this to me!
why?
so you'll take this, too, after using everything else?
half of it is mine!
what did you do to deserve half?
what did you ever do for mom?
then what did you ever do?
you lost and sold everything by gambling!
you even took my depos... house deposit and i got divorced because of that!
was your divorce my responsibility!
was it my fault?
of course it's your fault!
who else's would it be!
it's was your fault!
that's why my fingers got chopped off!
is your finger getting cut off my fault?
fine, then.
hit me with that hand!
hit me!
aish!
real...
it's not like you did anything right, miss, to be yelling at oppa?
unnie, you have no right to say that!
who was the one who told him to co-sign!
omo!
then do we leave oppa to die?
for now, we have to save him at least.
i'msosickofallthis, really!
be quiet!
it's not his fault!
miss!
as if you were ever good to us... for you to come and take it all?
you're saying that there is a dead spirit here right now?
that's right.
my dead wife is still here.
i've thought about the kids, and i've even thought about selling the house.
but that is not what my dead wife would have wanted.
so you'll remain as a stumbling block in the middle of my golf course?
fine, let's negotiate.
if my wife is here right now, how can i drive her away?
the dead person is here?
fine.
if she's really here, let's negotiate together.
what does she say?
you will know if you look at that flower.
my wife treasured that flower.
when i had decided to sell this house, that flower wilted and dried up.
but, just when i decided not to sell, it bloomed beautifully again, like that.
your wife expressed her opinion through that flower?
that's what you are saying, right?
that is correct.
if that's the case, i guess i'll have to negotiate with the flower.
flower wife, listen carefully and respond.
your husband does not wish to sell this house, but i must buy this house.
can you really never sell this house?
if so, please nod your flower neck.
if not, i'll cut your flower head.
what do you plan on doing?
can't you see i'm negotiating?
i will give you 3 seconds to decide.
1, 2,
3.
are you crazy?
the crazy one is you.
trying to overturn a deal closed between living people by dragging in a dead person, isn't that crazy?
since i cut off your dead wife's wishes for you, please follow the wishes of your living children.
please... sign.
you cruel bastard.
no matter what you say, my wife is here!
no, she isn't.
please come to your senses.
if you think lightly of a person's heart and ignore it like this because you can't see it, you'll be struck by lightning!
i'm going to continue to live smartly and well, ignoring the things i can't see.
if what i say is wrong,
i'll readily take that lightning strike.
there is no lighting that struck me.
you just sold this house.
congratulations.
if there are spirits, they'll definitely come to take someone like you.
are you really not scared of ghosts, joo goon?
why should i be afraid of a dead person?
the living are scarier.
i'll have to re-confirm the contract's contents.
please give me the recording.
yes.
i read the entire document and saved it on file number 4.
kingdom golf course purchase contract
seller:
kim wan yoong, hereinafter first party.
buyer:
kingdom, hereinafter second party.
the purchase agreement between first and second is agreed upon as follows:
what is that?
is it a person?
looks like they're hailing a car.
should i stop?
don't pay any attention and go on.
what is it?
no, it's just that there was a bright light.
did lightning strike?
scared me!
thank you.
aigoo.
i thought you were just going to pass by without seeing me, but you stopped.
what should i do?
just keep going.
why are you outside in the rain at this time?
just now, some lady came and talked to me.
that lady really got it right, as if she were a ghost.
right, she must be a ghost.
she said even if you avoided lightning, you wouldn't be able to avoid me.
i guess she was right.
but... is this car perhaps going to seoul?
yes.
no.
let her off somewhere near here.
yes, boss.
kingdom?
is this you, mr. ceo?
you felt that tingle, right?
no.
oh, there was a really strong tingle just now.
it was a strong tingle, wasn't it?
no!
my chance, is kingdom that really big shopping mall?
you see, i live nearby.
if you're going there
that intersection up there looks appropriate.
please get out there.
yes, i'll do that.
just keep going!
please don't stop!
miss.
miss, are you okay?
yes, thank you.
just a moment.
in the midst of the confusion of that woman screaming, we happened to bring her all the way here.
didn't she scream on purpose because i told her to get off?
that's not what it seemed like.
what did she see that made her so scared?
what?
you said you got into that accident after drinking.
i really don't understand how you can still long for alcohol after that.
no, it's fine.
i can't drink right now, i'm sorry.
it's fine, i haven't gotten married either.
i'm pretty?
really?
uh!
pres... !
don't follow me, go away.
i told you not to follow me.
he's not following me.
he left.
oh.
there are two things that i dislike.
one is someone touching my money and the other is someone touching my body.
i cut the flower that touched my money, but what should i do with the hand that touched my body?
oh, i'm sorry if i made you feel uncomfortable.
i did it because that man who was following me, scared me.
i don't see anything.
he was here and he was following me.
when i touched you like this, he disappeared.
but he's still listening to us, my back is tingling so much.
that lady ghost... is she friends with that man who followed you?
go have another drink with the lady and that man.
right now there isn't anyone.
i think it's because of you.
then again, i have a particular ability to get rid of annoyances that stick around.
want to see?
let go... and stay here.
don't get scared and watch closely.
hey!
she's following us.
she's crazy.
just keep going.
she said even if you avoided lightning, you wouldn't be able to avoid me... so that's why i'm here.
it's not here...
why isn't it here?
where is it?
i wish the rain would stop and the sun would shine.
the marriage between soccer player yoo hae sung and top star tae yi ryeong has been the center of much attention.
we will follow closely for the location and details of this couple's wedding.
did you see this morning's news?
there was an entertainment news report saying that
tae yi and yoo hae sung's wedding will take place at kingdom.
there were exactly 15 seconds on kingdom.
that's because it's a report on tae yi ryeong's wedding, not an advertisement for our kingdom.
if it's a wedding i sponsor for an advertisement model for my company, it's a company ad.
glean as much publicity as we paid for.
we'll get ten times as much.
speaking of which, there's been a problem.
an anonymous piece of mail was sent to the wedding hall.
this guy... is yoo hae seong.
that's right.
however, these two people in the picture... doesn't it look like they are having a wedding?
if this photo isn't a fake, then yoo hae seong has just found himself a past that will be quite expensive to deal with.
send her an invitation.
you must absolutely not send one to her.
what about her?
tae gong sil?
this girl..
if it's tae gong sil, then the last name... matches yours!
she's pretty.
were you close?
we weren't close.
even still, invite her.
my goodness!
just that... if you just open the can, we can eat on our own.
no, since i'm eating already, let's just eat together.
what about your mom?
she didn't come home yesterday either?
mom came back but she's busy so she went back!
but the lady in 202 said noona was weird.
she said you're a crazy hobo.
no.
it's because after a big accident in the past, i became a little different from other people.
even so, i even tried to live normally, going to work and everything.
i have prepared the coffee.
hey!
what are you doing right now?
but so many scary people found me even at work, but even still, there were some guys who were after me.
oh my!
but the scary apparitions kept getting in the way.
but somehow i try to live and i try to work.
welcome.
where shall i take you?
because i don't know when i will set my eyes on those scary people following me, i'm always scared.
it's difficult to keep going with my head held high.
i wish there were at least one place in this world where i could run away and hide.
get a man.
my mom said that she's seeing a man because she's tired and lonely.
you should do that, too.
a man?
pleasedon'tfollowme!
will that man see me?
this woman... was the girlfriend i was with before my fame and then she abandoned me.
to think she'd send this even to the wedding hall..
please be careful that it doesn't get leaked to the press.
this woman here is malicious.
if it's malicious, you should cut it off.
why do you live on with it?
i'm keeping this on out of spite.
the hate for the woman who abandoned me became fuel for me to keep going.
if you kept going for her to see, and if you're marrying for her to see, then that woman will probably come to the wedding.
please pay close attention to security.
the additional charge for paying extra attention will be added to your bill.
this marriage is a hot issue even abroad.
on the day of the wedding, reporters from many different countries will be present.
there will be worldwide publicity and kingdom will become a milestone of korean tourism.
especially, if we can attract chinese tourists by word of mouth from chinese fans,
kingdom's profits will skyrocket.
it's an important soccer player.
who are you?
why are you doing this to me?
so i just have to tell that soccer player about that thing that's buried under the tree?
we might be able to talk if we ride the elevator.
just a second!
wait a minute!
what are you?
who are you?
it's me.
what's going on?
it's a suspicious person.
send her out.
mr. ceo, it's me!
mr. ceo!
ah, wait a minute!
we met on a rainy day!
that day you were upset because i touched you.
don't you remember?
we even had that tingly moment in the car!
i even left my clothes that day.
you remember, don't you?
i came to meet you, but
i happened upon a reason to see yoo hae seong.
you have to meet the ceo and you have to meet the star.
you must be very busy.
i'm not going to meet yoo hae seong because i want to.
the one who's special to me is you.
if you're around me, i don't have to meet that person.
are you a vixen who latches on after one encounter?
or are you a crazy lady who's supposed to stay at home, but escapes from time to time?
if it's the former, i'll call a police car for you.
if it's the latter, i'll call an ambulance.
what kind of car do you want to go home in?
huh?
i've ridden in a police car, and an ambulance a few times, too.
but i don't want to ride in either of them again.
then, go quietly.
if you keep sticking around, you'll get to see a rougher method .
sticking around troublesomely is really something to hate, isn't it?
you just make eye contact once, but they creepily follow you.
and they keep asking favors that have nothing to do with me.
i know since i didn't like meeting those people, too.
i'll leave.
oppa says he's in spain.
hyung-nim's girl is even younger this time.
oh, she's pretty.
i guess ceo jo doesn't resemble hyung-nim very much seeing as he doesn't have very many women around.
i wonder if he doesn't have any because the ghost of that girl who died has latched onto him.
do i need to do a ritual for him?
i need to take a bigger part and find him a partner.
it'll be difficult.
haven't you heard that kingdom's master is caught in the curse of his first love?
everytime ceo jo's marriage is discussed, the woman's family falls into ruin, gets injured, or arrested.
word's out that all of that's because of the curse, so it'll be difficult to have a regular marriage.
what do you mean curse?
a curse on your nephew?
i know, right?
curse?
no, it's because of his personality he has no girlfriend.
he's never called me uncle.
that's... because you're so young, dear.
the stars... spill out...
the sun is... shi- ni- ng.
tom
tomorrow... will- become colder- probab- ly.
resume kang woo.
this is the best room we have.
but, are you really staying for a month?
yes.
if you go to the roof top, you can do your laundry and exercise.
the view's great too!
go away.
are you a person?
yes.
you're a person.
oh, you're staying in room 404.
since the grandmother left, you'll be able to sleep well.
there was a grandmother living in that room?
she wasn't living there, she was just there.
i have lived here for a long time so if you have a problem, let me know.
also, i'm sorry if i scared you earlier,
i thought you weren't a person.
i didn't think you were a person either.
i thought you were a cat.
happy and sleeping peacefully like a cat.
so it was like that.
why did you have to bother a sleeping cat?
meow!
he is good looking.
that person... meet him for me.
let's see an intimate pose.
yes, good.
bride, lean on the groom's shoulder.
after this marriage, will you forego your re-entry to the european league completely?
no, i will be making contact with a new agency.
you said you weren't going to europe.
you have your injury and your age to worry about.
if you go again, you'll just detract from your stardom.
you'll get flamed and downgraded.
before i'm a star,
i'm a soccer athlete.
and it's given that i want to run on a bigger stage.
hae seong...
people... say we are the korean victoria and beckham.
victoria doesn't want to encourage beckham to self-destruct.
you don't have the confidence either.
let's talk later.
i heard there's no one seeking you out anymore.
didn't your manager tell you?
hyung.
weren't we going to continue to search?
give up.
rather than imprudently heading for europe, it's much safer to live here with tae yi ryeong as a star couple.
forget it.
if you're not going to look, i'll look myself.
you can't be worrying about such things right now.
this came again.
why are we doing this?
later, if you ever you get rid of me... it's something to blackmail you with.
what are you talking about?
why would i abandon you?
you keep the key.
when i was with mi kyeong, it was during my hardest time.
i'd done a lot of things that, if they found out, people would point fingers at me for.
all my ugly past is probably in there.
ah, did you look for it?
where is that thing?
it's not there.
she must have taken it out.
do you think she's... blackmailing me with that?
don't worry.
just trust me.
as long as you're with me,
i'll take care of everything.
you scared me, miss.
i have a favor to ask.
by any chance, will the president be meeting yoo hae seong?
as far as i know, they are scheduled to meet today.
but i can't take you.
i guess you can't, huh?
then... perhaps can you give this to yoo hae seong?
when yoo hae seong sees this, he'll come to meet me.
please deliver it to him.
i'm so sleepy i could die.
i wish this would end quickly, so i could sleep.
this must be where she kept looking out for that person.
look at what?
i thought he was a nice guy.
what is this?
i'll wait beneath the tree at sky park's central plaza.
who is this face?
is this girl, perhaps, kim mi kyeong?
how do you know kim mi kyeong?
she's the woman that has been threatening yoo hae seong.
what do you mean threatening?
that's not it.
where is this girl?
she isn't here right now.
where did she go?
she... died.
she died?
then are you the one threatening us?
no.
i just wanted to relay her feelings.
the whole time, she has been wanting to protect and encourage him, is what she said.
so he knows how she really feels.
please give this to yoo hae seong.
you can't.
if she's dead, that's the end.
don't bother a living person.
mother!
ahjussi.
you're that lady from last time.
thanks about that.
isn't this a gambling place?
grandmother said not to gamble her money.
mind your own business.
ahjussi!
how can you do this?
grandmother asked you so many times not to gamble that money.
i even got you that.
why do you care so much about my late mother?
let go!
yeah.
i'm going around doing useless things.
what's so important about what the dead have to say?
no one ever even listens.
ah!
oh my!
get lost!
don't follow me!
stop bothering me!
people treat me like a crazy person because of people like you!
just leave me alone so i can live!
are you sure you were being blackmailed by kim mi kyeong?
i think you're mistaken.
no, it is that woman.
he saw her standing outside near the office.
you saw it personally?
that person... is dead.
i'll stop her so don't get so worked up.
i'll stick with you and everything will be solved.
i loved her, so i don't know why she's doing this to me.
probably for money.
is there anything a living person wants aside from money?
aren't you doing this because you're afraid of losing what you have now?
i'm... afraid of how she feels.
why fear the feelings you can't see?
you should be scared of the people you can.
anyway, i think you are going to do well.
i just applied for kingdom and got in.
yes, i will keep watch.
wow.
i got the occasion to meet yoo hae seong thanks to yi ryeong.
today is not tae yi ryeong's wedding day, but the day we make kingdom's advertisement.
we've positioned the kingdom logo so when photographing the bride and groom, there's no avoiding it.
even if they can see just one, hang a large one so everyone can see clearly.
make it as big as the money we put in.
big!
yes, big!
kim mi kyeong
you should come too.
i don't know if this is going to work or not, but you'll be too pitiful if we let him keep misunderstanding.
that woman even came here.
why is she so keen on meeting yoo hae seong?
something about relaying a dead person's feelings.
get security to take care of her so she doesn't get in the way.
yes.
team leader, the guest in the fourth camera from a-block, we have orders to follow that guest.
lee yeon joo, watch out for the female guest passing there.
meow
the cat?
you can take pictures.
and it's ok if you share with others that we're colleagues.
thank you.
you look pretty.
tae gong sil is not here yet?
gong sil?
'big sun'?
she's coming?
that's right.
tae gong sil was the 'big sun', and you were 'little sun'.
that's right.
i wonder how she is now.
i heard she turned really strange.
why?
tae gong sil did?
i am friends with the bride.
you're on the list.
come in.
confirm her.
yes.
that woman is a guest attending yi ryeong's wedding.
she is?
is she on the guest list?
did you check?
yes.
she went to the same high school as tae yi ryeong.
they call her tae gong sil.
tae gong sil?
so did you let her in?
excuse me.
who are you?
this..
why do you have this?
the person threatening me was you?
what about mi kyeong?
where is mi kyeong?
mi kyeong must have come with you.
where is she?
so you blackmail me with this and what, do you want money?
fine.
i'll give you that money.
where is mi kyeong?
where is she?
mi kyeong... passed away.
what?
she was already sick when you left her.
she hurt very much until she passed.
you were so frighteningly mistaken.
so i came to tell you mi kyeong's true feelings.
why isn't hae seong coming?
what about hae seong?
yi ryeong, yoo hae seong has disappeared.
what?
they said he went outside for a while.
did the groom possibly run away?
ah!
that blackmailer must have shown up.
there's no way she could show up.
she definitely died...
ah...that's not what i meant.
i knew you have been blackmailing her.
if you were going to do that, you should have done a better job.
seems like you are the one that is blackmailing him!
but...
what are you looking at?
tae gong sil...
i must have relayed your feelings wrong.
you held onto your memories here, all alone.
i wonder how you must have felt.
hae seong.
i miss you.
i miss you so much.
let's stop here.
going further is a little...
mi kyeong...
what are you talking about?
i can't pick up after you anymore.
go on by yourself.
mi kyeong.
mi kyeong!
mi kyeong wanted to show you how she felt.
just...
go.
my life is over anyway.
it's not over.
you have to continue soccer, okay?
i know you like soccer.
is that a good thing?
those cleats were the first things she'd ever given to you...
mi kyeong.
i miss you.
...and leaving you was the last thing she could have done for you.
oppa!
hae seong!
i've been waiting without ruining everything.
so talk to me.
i...
i know it's too much, but i want to keep playing soccer.
the woman inside my heart keeps encouraging me to.
i will compensate for the damages.
because of the blackmail scandal, my manager agreed to take responsibility without complaint.
as the dead lingers around, the living person suffers in the end.
though your event may have been ruined, my wedding was saved.
this... was my real wedding.
at your age, and with your injury, it won't be easy to return to playing in the big leagues.
you will come to repeatedly regret this moment.
that could happen.
that is what will happen.
the romance that the dead brought may have given you courage, but it doesn't give you skill.
i'm going to enjoy watching you fail in every match.
watching soccer's about to become much more enjoyable.
are you cursing me?
yes.
so take that grudge against me and try to live well, so i can see - just like you did last time.
you can go.
ah.
tae gong sil asked me to tell you something.
please, no one come to me today.
i'm so tired to death!
i wish i could run away somewhere and sleep peacefully.
don't come.
go away.
what did you say tae gong sil said?
that the dead have no power, but their feelings remain.
there's someone like that for you, too.
joo goon, do you also have someone in your heart, that is dead and you cannot forget?
hee joo!
cha hee joo!
hee joo!
tae gong sil
what are you saying is next to me?
what do you see beside me?
i'm so sleepy!
tell me.
what is it that's beside me?
i want to sleep next to you.
__file_terminal__
the master's sun
episode 1
tae yang!
miss tae.
yes?
this afternoon, room 404 left again.
go clean up.
room 404?
i don't understand why that room can't go for long without being vacated.
is the chest of drawers unlucky?
tae yang, take the dresser from that room out, too.
yes.
pretend you didn't see.
mom!
go away!
i told you to go!
excuse me.
a grandmother told me to give you this money.
our mother?
this money...
it's ten million won!
it really is!
omo!
she said to use it to help fund the funeral and use the rest to pay off your debt.
mother.
there was also something else she wanted me to tell you.
please, tell me.
you rotten bastard!
if you ever touch gambling again, i'll come and cut your hand off, you bastard!
don't gamble anymore!
is what she said.
it really is mom's account book.
my word, ten million won.
how did she have this money?
give it to me.
that's not all yours, half of it is mine.
how is it yours?
mother told her to deliver this to me!
why?
so you'll take this, too, after using everything else?
half of it is mine!
what did you do to deserve half?
what did you ever do for mom?
then what did you ever do?
you lost and sold everything by gambling!
you even took my depos... house deposit and i got divorced because of that!
was your divorce my responsibility!
was it my fault?
of course it's your fault!
who else's would it be!
it's was your fault!
that's why my fingers got chopped off!
is your finger getting cut off my fault?
fine, then.
hit me with that hand!
hit me!
aish!
real...
it's not like you did anything right, miss, to be yelling at oppa?
unnie, you have no right to say that!
who was the one who told him to co-sign!
omo!
then do we leave oppa to die?
for now, we have to save him at least.
i'msosickofallthis, really!
be quiet!
it's not his fault!
miss!
as if you were ever good to us... for you to come and take it all?
you're saying that there is a dead spirit here right now?
that's right.
my dead wife is still here.
i've thought about the kids, and i've even thought about selling the house.
but that is not what my dead wife would have wanted.
so you'll remain as a stumbling block in the middle of my golf course?
fine, let's negotiate.
if my wife is here right now, how can i drive her away?
the dead person is here?
fine.
if she's really here, let's negotiate together.
what does she say?
you will know if you look at that flower.
my wife treasured that flower.
when i had decided to sell this house, that flower wilted and dried up.
but, just when i decided not to sell, it bloomed beautifully again, like that.
your wife expressed her opinion through that flower?
that's what you are saying, right?
that is correct.
if that's the case, i guess i'll have to negotiate with the flower.
flower wife, listen carefully and respond.
your husband does not wish to sell this house, but i must buy this house.
can you really never sell this house?
if so, please nod your flower neck.
if not, i'll cut your flower head.
what do you plan on doing?
can't you see i'm negotiating?
i will give you 3 seconds to decide.
1, 2,
3.
are you crazy?
the crazy one is you.
trying to overturn a deal closed between living people by dragging in a dead person, isn't that crazy?
since i cut off your dead wife's wishes for you, please follow the wishes of your living children.
please... sign.
you cruel bastard.
no matter what you say, my wife is here!
no, she isn't.
please come to your senses.
if you think lightly of a person's heart and ignore it like this because you can't see it, you'll be struck by lightning!
i'm going to continue to live smartly and well, ignoring the things i can't see.
if what i say is wrong,
i'll readily take that lightning strike.
there is no lighting that struck me.
you just sold this house.
congratulations.
if there are spirits, they'll definitely come to take someone like you.
are you really not scared of ghosts, joo goon?
why should i be afraid of a dead person?
the living are scarier.
i'll have to re-confirm the contract's contents.
please give me the recording.
yes.
i read the entire document and saved it on file number 4.
kingdom golf course purchase contract
seller:
kim wan yoong, hereinafter first party.
buyer:
kingdom, hereinafter second party.
the purchase agreement between first and second is agreed upon as follows:
what is that?
is it a person?
looks like they're hailing a car.
should i stop?
don't pay any attention and go on.
what is it?
no, it's just that there was a bright light.
did lightning strike?
scared me!
thank you.
aigoo.
i thought you were just going to pass by without seeing me, but you stopped.
what should i do?
just keep going.
why are you outside in the rain at this time?
just now, some lady came and talked to me.
that lady really got it right, as if she were a ghost.
right, she must be a ghost.
she said even if you avoided lightning, you wouldn't be able to avoid me.
i guess she was right.
but... is this car perhaps going to seoul?
yes.
no.
let her off somewhere near here.
yes, boss.
kingdom?
is this you, mr. ceo?
you felt that tingle, right?
no.
oh, there was a really strong tingle just now.
it was a strong tingle, wasn't it?
no!
my chance, is kingdom that really big shopping mall?
you see, i live nearby.
if you're going there
that intersection up there looks appropriate.
please get out there.
yes, i'll do that.
just keep going!
please don't stop!
miss.
miss, are you okay?
yes, thank you.
just a moment.
in the midst of the confusion of that woman screaming, we happened to bring her all the way here.
didn't she scream on purpose because i told her to get off?
that's not what it seemed like.
what did she see that made her so scared?
what?
you said you got into that accident after drinking.
i really don't understand how you can still long for alcohol after that.
no, it's fine.
i can't drink right now, i'm sorry.
it's fine, i haven't gotten married either.
i'm pretty?
really?
uh!
pres... !
don't follow me, go away.
i told you not to follow me.
he's not following me.
he left.
oh.
there are two things that i dislike.
one is someone touching my money and the other is someone touching my body.
i cut the flower that touched my money, but what should i do with the hand that touched my body?
oh, i'm sorry if i made you feel uncomfortable.
i did it because that man who was following me, scared me.
i don't see anything.
he was here and he was following me.
when i touched you like this, he disappeared.
but he's still listening to us, my back is tingling so much.
that lady ghost... is she friends with that man who followed you?
go have another drink with the lady and that man.
right now there isn't anyone.
i think it's because of you.
then again, i have a particular ability to get rid of annoyances that stick around.
want to see?
let go... and stay here.
don't get scared and watch closely.
hey!
she's following us.
she's crazy.
just keep going.
she said even if you avoided lightning, you wouldn't be able to avoid me... so that's why i'm here.
it's not here...
why isn't it here?
where is it?
i wish the rain would stop and the sun would shine.
the marriage between soccer player yoo hae sung and top star tae yi ryeong has been the center of much attention.
we will follow closely for the location and details of this couple's wedding.
did you see this morning's news?
there was an entertainment news report saying that
tae yi and yoo hae sung's wedding will take place at kingdom.
there were exactly 15 seconds on kingdom.
that's because it's a report on tae yi ryeong's wedding, not an advertisement for our kingdom.
if it's a wedding i sponsor for an advertisement model for my company, it's a company ad.
glean as much publicity as we paid for.
we'll get ten times as much.
speaking of which, there's been a problem.
an anonymous piece of mail was sent to the wedding hall.
this guy... is yoo hae seong.
that's right.
however, these two people in the picture... doesn't it look like they are having a wedding?
if this photo isn't a fake, then yoo hae seong has just found himself a past that will be quite expensive to deal with.
send her an invitation.
you must absolutely not send one to her.
what about her?
tae gong sil?
this girl..
if it's tae gong sil, then the last name... matches yours!
she's pretty.
were you close?
we weren't close.
even still, invite her.
my goodness!
just that... if you just open the can, we can eat on our own.
no, since i'm eating already, let's just eat together.
what about your mom?
she didn't come home yesterday either?
mom came back but she's busy so she went back!
but the lady in 202 said noona was weird.
she said you're a crazy hobo.
no.
it's because after a big accident in the past, i became a little different from other people.
even so, i even tried to live normally, going to work and everything.
i have prepared the coffee.
hey!
what are you doing right now?
but so many scary people found me even at work, but even still, there were some guys who were after me.
oh my!
but the scary apparitions kept getting in the way.
but somehow i try to live and i try to work.
welcome.
where shall i take you?
because i don't know when i will set my eyes on those scary people following me, i'm always scared.
it's difficult to keep going with my head held high.
i wish there were at least one place in this world where i could run away and hide.
get a man.
my mom said that she's seeing a man because she's tired and lonely.
you should do that, too.
a man?
pleasedon'tfollowme!
will that man see me?
this woman... was the girlfriend i was with before my fame and then she abandoned me.
to think she'd send this even to the wedding hall..
please be careful that it doesn't get leaked to the press.
this woman here is malicious.
if it's malicious, you should cut it off.
why do you live on with it?
i'm keeping this on out of spite.
the hate for the woman who abandoned me became fuel for me to keep going.
if you kept going for her to see, and if you're marrying for her to see, then that woman will probably come to the wedding.
please pay close attention to security.
the additional charge for paying extra attention will be added to your bill.
this marriage is a hot issue even abroad.
on the day of the wedding, reporters from many different countries will be present.
there will be worldwide publicity and kingdom will become a milestone of korean tourism.
especially, if we can attract chinese tourists by word of mouth from chinese fans,
kingdom's profits will skyrocket.
it's an important soccer player.
who are you?
why are you doing this to me?
so i just have to tell that soccer player about that thing that's buried under the tree?
we might be able to talk if we ride the elevator.
just a second!
wait a minute!
what are you?
who are you?
it's me.
what's going on?
it's a suspicious person.
send her out.
mr. ceo, it's me!
mr. ceo!
ah, wait a minute!
we met on a rainy day!
that day you were upset because i touched you.
don't you remember?
we even had that tingly moment in the car!
i even left my clothes that day.
you remember, don't you?
i came to meet you, but
i happened upon a reason to see yoo hae seong.
you have to meet the ceo and you have to meet the star.
you must be very busy.
i'm not going to meet yoo hae seong because i want to.
the one who's special to me is you.
if you're around me, i don't have to meet that person.
are you a vixen who latches on after one encounter?
or are you a crazy lady who's supposed to stay at home, but escapes from time to time?
if it's the former, i'll call a police car for you.
if it's the latter, i'll call an ambulance.
what kind of car do you want to go home in?
huh?
i've ridden in a police car, and an ambulance a few times, too.
but i don't want to ride in either of them again.
then, go quietly.
if you keep sticking around, you'll get to see a rougher method .
sticking around troublesomely is really something to hate, isn't it?
you just make eye contact once, but they creepily follow you.
and they keep asking favors that have nothing to do with me.
i know since i didn't like meeting those people, too.
i'll leave.
oppa says he's in spain.
hyung-nim's girl is even younger this time.
oh, she's pretty.
i guess ceo jo doesn't resemble hyung-nim very much seeing as he doesn't have very many women around.
i wonder if he doesn't have any because the ghost of that girl who died has latched onto him.
do i need to do a ritual for him?
i need to take a bigger part and find him a partner.
it'll be difficult.
haven't you heard that kingdom's master is caught in the curse of his first love?
everytime ceo jo's marriage is discussed, the woman's family falls into ruin, gets injured, or arrested.
word's out that all of that's because of the curse, so it'll be difficult to have a regular marriage.
what do you mean curse?
a curse on your nephew?
i know, right?
curse?
no, it's because of his personality he has no girlfriend.
he's never called me uncle.
that's... because you're so young, dear.
the stars... spill out...
the sun is... shi- ni- ng.
tom
tomorrow... will- become colder- probab- ly.
resume kang woo.
this is the best room we have.
but, are you really staying for a month?
yes.
if you go to the roof top, you can do your laundry and exercise.
the view's great too!
go away.
are you a person?
yes.
you're a person.
oh, you're staying in room 404.
since the grandmother left, you'll be able to sleep well.
there was a grandmother living in that room?
she wasn't living there, she was just there.
i have lived here for a long time so if you have a problem, let me know.
also, i'm sorry if i scared you earlier,
i thought you weren't a person.
i didn't think you were a person either.
i thought you were a cat.
happy and sleeping peacefully like a cat.
so it was like that.
why did you have to bother a sleeping cat?
meow!
he is good looking.
that person... meet him for me.
let's see an intimate pose.
yes, good.
bride, lean on the groom's shoulder.
after this marriage, will you forego your re-entry to the european league completely?
no, i will be making contact with a new agency.
you said you weren't going to europe.
you have your injury and your age to worry about.
if you go again, you'll just detract from your stardom.
you'll get flamed and downgraded.
before i'm a star,
i'm a soccer athlete.
and it's given that i want to run on a bigger stage.
hae seong...
people... say we are the korean victoria and beckham.
victoria doesn't want to encourage beckham to self-destruct.
you don't have the confidence either.
let's talk later.
i heard there's no one seeking you out anymore.
didn't your manager tell you?
hyung.
weren't we going to continue to search?
give up.
rather than imprudently heading for europe, it's much safer to live here with tae yi ryeong as a star couple.
forget it.
if you're not going to look, i'll look myself.
you can't be worrying about such things right now.
this came again.
why are we doing this?
later, if you ever you get rid of me... it's something to blackmail you with.
what are you talking about?
why would i abandon you?
you keep the key.
when i was with mi kyeong, it was during my hardest time.
i'd done a lot of things that, if they found out, people would point fingers at me for.
all my ugly past is probably in there.
ah, did you look for it?
where is that thing?
it's not there.
she must have taken it out.
do you think she's... blackmailing me with that?
don't worry.
just trust me.
as long as you're with me,
i'll take care of everything.
you scared me, miss.
i have a favor to ask.
by any chance, will the president be meeting yoo hae seong?
as far as i know, they are scheduled to meet today.
but i can't take you.
i guess you can't, huh?
then... perhaps can you give this to yoo hae seong?
when yoo hae seong sees this, he'll come to meet me.
please deliver it to him.
i'm so sleepy i could die.
i wish this would end quickly, so i could sleep.
this must be where she kept looking out for that person.
look at what?
i thought he was a nice guy.
what is this?
i'll wait beneath the tree at sky park's central plaza.
who is this face?
is this girl, perhaps, kim mi kyeong?
how do you know kim mi kyeong?
she's the woman that has been threatening yoo hae seong.
what do you mean threatening?
that's not it.
where is this girl?
she isn't here right now.
where did she go?
she... died.
she died?
then are you the one threatening us?
no.
i just wanted to relay her feelings.
the whole time, she has been wanting to protect and encourage him, is what she said.
so he knows how she really feels.
please give this to yoo hae seong.
you can't.
if she's dead, that's the end.
don't bother a living person.
mother!
ahjussi.
you're that lady from last time.
thanks about that.
isn't this a gambling place?
grandmother said not to gamble her money.
mind your own business.
ahjussi!
how can you do this?
grandmother asked you so many times not to gamble that money.
i even got you that.
why do you care so much about my late mother?
let go!
yeah.
i'm going around doing useless things.
what's so important about what the dead have to say?
no one ever even listens.
ah!
oh my!
get lost!
don't follow me!
stop bothering me!
people treat me like a crazy person because of people like you!
just leave me alone so i can live!
are you sure you were being blackmailed by kim mi kyeong?
i think you're mistaken.
no, it is that woman.
he saw her standing outside near the office.
you saw it personally?
that person... is dead.
i'll stop her so don't get so worked up.
i'll stick with you and everything will be solved.
i loved her, so i don't know why she's doing this to me.
probably for money.
is there anything a living person wants aside from money?
aren't you doing this because you're afraid of losing what you have now?
i'm... afraid of how she feels.
why fear the feelings you can't see?
you should be scared of the people you can.
anyway, i think you are going to do well.
i just applied for kingdom and got in.
yes, i will keep watch.
wow.
i got the occasion to meet yoo hae seong thanks to yi ryeong.
today is not tae yi ryeong's wedding day, but the day we make kingdom's advertisement.
we've positioned the kingdom logo so when photographing the bride and groom, there's no avoiding it.
even if they can see just one, hang a large one so everyone can see clearly.
make it as big as the money we put in.
big!
yes, big!
kim mi kyeong
you should come too.
i don't know if this is going to work or not, but you'll be too pitiful if we let him keep misunderstanding.
that woman even came here.
why is she so keen on meeting yoo hae seong?
something about relaying a dead person's feelings.
get security to take care of her so she doesn't get in the way.
yes.
team leader, the guest in the fourth camera from a-block, we have orders to follow that guest.
lee yeon joo, watch out for the female guest passing there.
meow
the cat?
you can take pictures.
and it's ok if you share with others that we're colleagues.
thank you.
you look pretty.
tae gong sil is not here yet?
gong sil?
'big sun'?
she's coming?
that's right.
tae gong sil was the 'big sun', and you were 'little sun'.
that's right.
i wonder how she is now.
i heard she turned really strange.
why?
tae gong sil did?
i am friends with the bride.
you're on the list.
come in.
confirm her.
yes.
that woman is a guest attending yi ryeong's wedding.
she is?
is she on the guest list?
did you check?
yes.
she went to the same high school as tae yi ryeong.
they call her tae gong sil.
tae gong sil?
so did you let her in?
excuse me.
who are you?
this..
why do you have this?
the person threatening me was you?
what about mi kyeong?
where is mi kyeong?
mi kyeong must have come with you.
where is she?
so you blackmail me with this and what, do you want money?
fine.
i'll give you that money.
where is mi kyeong?
where is she?
mi kyeong... passed away.
what?
she was already sick when you left her.
she hurt very much until she passed.
you were so frighteningly mistaken.
so i came to tell you mi kyeong's true feelings.
why isn't hae seong coming?
what about hae seong?
yi ryeong, yoo hae seong has disappeared.
what?
they said he went outside for a while.
did the groom possibly run away?
ah!
that blackmailer must have shown up.
there's no way she could show up.
she definitely died...
ah...that's not what i meant.
i knew you have been blackmailing her.
if you were going to do that, you should have done a better job.
seems like you are the one that is blackmailing him!
but...
what are you looking at?
tae gong sil...
i must have relayed your feelings wrong.
you held onto your memories here, all alone.
i wonder how you must have felt.
hae seong.
i miss you.
i miss you so much.
let's stop here.
going further is a little...
mi kyeong...
what are you talking about?
i can't pick up after you anymore.
go on by yourself.
mi kyeong.
mi kyeong!
mi kyeong wanted to show you how she felt.
just...
go.
my life is over anyway.
it's not over.
you have to continue soccer, okay?
i know you like soccer.
is that a good thing?
those cleats were the first things she'd ever given to you...
mi kyeong.
i miss you.
...and leaving you was the last thing she could have done for you.
oppa!
hae seong!
i've been waiting without ruining everything.
so talk to me.
i...
i know it's too much, but i want to keep playing soccer.
the woman inside my heart keeps encouraging me to.
i will compensate for the damages.
because of the blackmail scandal, my manager agreed to take responsibility without complaint.
as the dead lingers around, the living person suffers in the end.
though your event may have been ruined, my wedding was saved.
this... was my real wedding.
at your age, and with your injury, it won't be easy to return to playing in the big leagues.
you will come to repeatedly regret this moment.
that could happen.
that is what will happen.
the romance that the dead brought may have given you courage, but it doesn't give you skill.
i'm going to enjoy watching you fail in every match.
watching soccer's about to become much more enjoyable.
are you cursing me?
yes.
so take that grudge against me and try to live well, so i can see - just like you did last time.
you can go.
ah.
tae gong sil asked me to tell you something.
please, no one come to me today.
i'm so tired to death!
i wish i could run away somewhere and sleep peacefully.
don't come.
go away.
what did you say tae gong sil said?
that the dead have no power, but their feelings remain.
there's someone like that for you, too.
joo goon, do you also have someone in your heart, that is dead and you cannot forget?
hee joo!
cha hee joo!
hee joo!
tae gong sil
what are you saying is next to me?
what do you see beside me?
i'm so sleepy!
tell me.
what is it that's beside me?
i want to sleep next to you.
__file_terminal__
episode 1.
miss tae.
miss tae!
room 404 moved out again this afternoon.
you need to clean it.
room 404?
i don't know why no one stays in that room.
they are always moving out.
i wonder if it's cursed or something.
miss tae.
take everything out of the drawers from that room.
yes.
what do i do?
go away!
i said, go away!
excuse me.
grandmother wanted... she wanted me to give this to you.
my mother?
this money...
it's more than ten million won!
it is!
oh my goodness!
she wants you to use it to help with the funeral costs... and use the rest to pay off all the debts.
mother.
and she wanted me to tell you something.
yes, go ahead.
you rotten bastard.
if you ever start gambling again...
i'm going to come back and chop off your hands, you bastard.
no gambling, you bastard!
that's what she wanted me to tell you.
let me see.
it really is my mother's bank account!
my goodness, there really is more than ten million won in there.
where did she get all this money?
give it to me.
that's not all yours, half of it is mine, okay?
how is any of this yours?
mom wanted me to have this.
you've already taken enough away from us, and you're going to take this from us, too?
half of it is mine!
what have you ever done to think that half of it is yours?
what have you ever done for mom?
then what about you?
what have you ever done?
all you've ever done is lose everything we have from the gambling!
you even lost all my savings, and my husband divorced me because of you!
how is your divorce my fault?
that's not my fault!
of course, it's your fault!
who's fault is it then?
my finger got chopped off because you couldn't pay off the debt!
how is your finger getting chopped off my fault?
fine!
hit me with that hand!
hit me!
how dare you yell at your brother like that?
you shouldn't be like this!
he lost all my savings!
then what we're we to do?
just leave your brother to die?
we had to save your brother's life!
this is so unfair!
shut up, you wench!
how can you say that to him?
your brother has always been so good to you!
he's always helped you out!
are you telling me... that there's a spirit of a ghost in this house?
that's right.
the spirit of my dead wife is still in this house.
i even thought about selling this house for the sake of my kids.
however... my late wife doesn't want me to do that.
you're insisting on staying here in the middle of where my golf course is going to be built?
okay, fine.
why don't we negotiate?
my wife is here with me right now.
so, how can you expect me to force her out?
a dead person... is still here.
okay, then.
if she really is here, then why don't we all negotiate it together?
what is she saying to you?
take a look at that flower, and you'll know.
that flower was treasured by my wife, and she grew that flower herself.
when i was considering selling this house, that flower started to wilt and almost died.
but... once i decided not to sell the house... the flower came back to life and started to bloom again.
your wife used that potted flower to tell you how she felt?
that's what you're telling me?
that's correct.
in that case, i can just negotiate with that flower.
flower wife...
listen very carefully, and tell me what your thoughts are.
he's telling me right now that he doesn't want to sell this house... but i still want to buy it.
are you saying that you won't sell?
if that's the case, then nod yes, with the flower head.
otherwise...
i'm going to cut off the head of the flower.
what do you think you're doing right now?
i'm negotiating with her right now.
i'll give you three seconds.
one.
two.
three.
are you crazy?
you're the one who's crazy.
breaking off and negating a deal that's already been made between two living people by dragging in some wild story about an already dead person.
that's something a crazy person does.
isn't it?
since i got the opinion of your dead wife... why don't you follow the wishes of your kids, who are still alive?
sign... the papers.
heartless bastard.
no matter what you say, my wife is still in this house!
no, she's not.
you need to get your head on straight.
if you ignore a person's feelings and take their feelings for a joke just because you can't see them with your naked eye... you're going to get struck down by lightening!
i'm going to continue to live intelligently, and successfully like i currently do while ignoring the things that i can't see.
if what i've just said is wrong... then let lightening... strike me down.
it seems that i'm not going to get struck down by lightning.
however, you and your family has just been struck by a flood of money.
congratulations.
if there are such things as ghosts... they'll come to get jerks like you.
are you... really not afraid of ghosts at all?
why would i be afraid of a dead person?
it's the people that are still living that are scary.
once the contract is complete, i want to take a look at it again.
can you give me what you've got recorded?
yes.
i've recorded the whole thing, and it's saved onto file number four.
[kingdom golf course site contract.]
seller, kim han hee agrees to sell.
buyer, kingdom has agree to buy.
start the next phase on pricing and other condition negotiations.
what is that up there?
is that a person?
i think she's trying to flag us down.
should i stop the car?
just ignore it, and keep going.
what is it?
there was a sudden flash of light.
i wonder if it was lightening.
oh my goodness.
what the heck?
thank you.
i thought that you didn't see me, and was going to just drive past me.
but i guess that you did see me.
what would you like for me to do?
just go.
yes.
why were you standing out there like that?
what if no one came?
some lady told me that a car would come by if i waited in that spot.
that lady got that on the mark like a ghost.
right?
yes, she was very ghostly.
she said that even though he may have avoided the lightening... he won't be able to avoid me.
i guess she was right.
but... by any chance... is this car headed to seoul?
yes.
no.
drop her off nearby somewhere.
yes, president.
kingdom?
are you the president of this place?
did you feel that spark?
no.
i just felt a really strong spark.
it was really strong, wasn't it?
no.
um... by any chance... is kingdom the same company that owns that really large shopping mall?
i live very close to that mall, and if that's where you're headed...
i think that intersection up there would be a good spot to drop you off.
why don't you get off there?
okay, i will.
just keep going.
please just get me out of here!
miss.
are you okay?
yes, thank you.
please excuse me a moment.
that woman got us to bring her all the way here without us even realizing it... because she flustered us with her screams.
